<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Settlement of Illinois, 1778-1830</title>
      <author><name reg="Boggess, Arthur Clinton">Arthur Clinton Boggess</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>October 9, 2010</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">34049</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2010-10-09">October 9, 2010</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Geetu Melwani, Audrey Longhurst, Nancy Faller of The Morton
            Arboretum, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
            &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made available by
            The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="text-align: center">Chicago Historical Society's Collection.&mdash;Vol. V.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Settlement of Illinois</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">1778-1830</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">by Arthur Clinton Boggess, Ph.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of History and political Science in Pacific
University; a Director of the Oregon Historical Society; sometime Harrison Scholar in
American History in the University of Pennsylvania; sometime Fellow in American
History in the University of Wisconsin.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Chicago</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Published by the society</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1908</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='i'/><anchor id='Pgi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
In the work here presented, an attempt has been made to
apply in the field of history, the study of types so long in
use in biological science. If the settlement of Illinois had been
an isolated historical fact, its narration would have been too
provincial to be seriously considered, but in many respects, the
history of this settlement is typical of that of other regions.
The Indian question, the land question, the transportation problem,
the problem of local government; these are a few of the
classes of questions wherein the experience of Illinois was not
unique.
</p>

<p>
This work was prepared while the writer was a student in the
University of Wisconsin. The first draft was critically and carefully
read by Prof. Frederick Jackson Turner, of that University,
and the second draft was read by Prof. John Bach McMaster,
of the University of Pennsylvania. In addition to suggestions
received from my teachers, valuable aid has been rendered by
Miss Caroline M. McIlvaine, the librarian of the Chicago Historical
Society, who placed at my disposal her wide knowledge
of the sources of Illinois history.
</p>

<p>
The omission of any reference in this work to the French
manuscripts, found by Clarence W. Alvord, is due to the fact
that at the time they were found, my work was so nearly completed
that it was loaned to Mr. Alvord to use in the preparation of
his article on the County of Illinois, while the press of professional
duties has been such that a subsequent use of the manuscripts
has been impracticable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Arthur C. Boggess.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Pacific University,</l>
<l>Forest Grove, Oregon.</l>
<l>September 14, 1907.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The County of Illinois.</head>

<p>
An Act for establishing the County of Illinois, and for
the more effectual protection and defence thereof,
passed both houses of the Virginia legislature on December
9, 1778.<note place='foot'><p><q>Jour. H. of Del.,</q> Va., Oct.
Sess., 1778, 106-7; <q>Jour. of Senate,</q> Va.,
Oct. Sess., 1778, 52.
</p>
<p>
Erroneous statements concerning the time of the formation of the County of
Illinois have been made by Winsor, <q>Westward Movement,</q> 122; Poole, in
Winsor, <q>Narrative and Crit. Hist. of Am.,</q> VI., 729; Thwaites, <q>How George
Rogers Clark Won the Northwest,</q> 64; Boyd, in <q>Am. Hist. Rev.,</q> IV., 623;
Mason, in <q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 286; Pirtle, <q>Clark's Campaign in
the Ill.,</q> 5; Moore, <q>The Northwest Under Three Flags,</q> 220; Wallace,
<q>Hist, of Ill. and La. Under French Rule,</q> 402; Butler, <q>Hist. of Ky.,</q> 1836
ed., 64; and others. Roosevelt's indefinite statement that the county was
formed <q>in the fall of 1778</q>&mdash;<q>Winning of the West,</q> II., 168&mdash;is
technically correct. Kate Mason Rowland truthfully says&mdash;<q>George Mason,</q>
I., 307, 308&mdash;that
a committee was ordered to prepare a bill for the formation of the county,
on November 19, 1778, and that such a bill was presented on November 30.
Butterfield says&mdash;<q>George Rogers Clark's Conquest of the Ill.,</q> 681-6&mdash;that
the Act was passed between the 10th of November and the 12th of December,
1778. It is true that the bill in its final amended form passed both houses on
December 9, was signed by the Speaker of the Senate on December 17, and
subsequently, if at all, by the Speaker of the House of Delegates. On the
12th of December, Governor Patrick Henry issued three important sets of
instructions in accordance with the provisions of the Act creating the County
of Illinois. As the signing of the bill by the Speakers was mandatory after
its passage, it is easy to understand the issuance of these instructions previous
to the signing. It is almost impossible to conceive that Governor Henry, who
showed marked interest in the Western frontier, should first have begun to
issue orders at least six weeks after the county was formed, as is implied by
the date commonly given for its formation. For the legislative history of the
act, see <q>Jour. H. of Del.,</q> Va., Oct. Sess., 1778, 65, 72, 79-80, 91, 96, 106-7;
<q>Jour. of Senate,</q> Va., Oct. Sess., 1778, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 70-1.</p></note>
The new county was to include the inhabitants
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
of Virginia, north of the Ohio River, but its location
was not more definitely prescribed.<note place='foot'><q>Jour. H. of Del.</q>
Va., Oct. Sess., 1778, 72; <q>Hening's Statutes,</q> IX., 553.</note>
</p>

<p>
The words <q>for the more effectual protection and defence
thereof</q> in the title of the Act were thoroughly appropriate.
The Indians were in almost undisputed possession of
the land in Illinois, save the inconsiderable holdings of the
French. Some grants and sales of large tracts of land had
been made. In 1769, John Wilkins, British commandant
in Illinois, granted to the trading-firm of Baynton,
Wharton and Morgan, a great tract of land lying between
the Kaskaskia and the Mississippi rivers. The claim
to the land descended to John Edgar, who shared it with
John Murray St. Clair, son of Gov. Arthur St. Clair. The
claim was filed for 13,986 acres, but was found on survey
to contain 23,000 acres, and was confirmed by Gov. St. Clair.
At a later examination of titles, this claim was rejected
because the grant was made in the first instance counter
to the king's proclamation of 1763, and because the confirmation
by Gov. St. Clair was made after his authority
ceased and was not signed by the Secretary of the Northwest
Territory.<note place='foot'><q>Public Lands,</q> II., 204,
206-9.</note> In 1773, William Murray and others,
subsequently known as the Illinois Land Company, bought
two large tracts of land in Illinois from the Illinois Indians.
In 1775, a great tract lying on both sides of the Wabash
was similarly purchased by what later became the Wabash
Land Company. The purchase of the Illinois Company
was made in the presence, but without the sanction, of the
British officers, and Gen. Thomas Gage had the Indians
re-convened and the validity of the purchase expressly
denied. These large grants were illegal, and the Indians
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
were not in consequence disposessed of them.<note place='foot'>The
Illinois and Wabash Land companies, which had several members
in common, united in 1780. After a long series of memorials to Congress,
the Supreme Court of the United States, in 1823, decided that <q>a title to land,
under grant to private individuals, made by Indian tribes or nations, northwest
of the river Ohio, in 1773 and 1775, can not be recognized in the courts
of the United States</q>&mdash;8 <q>Wheaton,</q> 543-605. In general see: <q>Pub.
Lands,</q> I., 24, 27, 72, 74, 160, 189, 301; II., 108-20, 138, 253; <q>Sen. Jour.,</q>
1793-99, 317, 326; <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, <q>2d Cong.,</q> 165; <q>Va.
Calendar State Papers,</q> I.,
314; <q>Jour. of Cong.,</q> III., 676-7, 681; IV., 23; <q>An Account of the Proceedings
of the Ill. and Ouabache Land Companies,</q> 1-55, Phil'a, 1796; <q>Memorial
of the Ill. and Wabash Land Company,</q> 1-26, Phil'a, 1797; <q>Memorial
of the Ill. and Ouabache Land Companies,</q> 1802, 1-20; <q>An Account of the
Proceedings of the Ill. and Ouabache Land Company,</q> 1-74, Phil'a, 1803;
<q>Memorial of the United Ill. and Wabash Land Companies,</q> 1-48, Baltimore,
1816. For a map of the claims, see <q>Map of the State of Ky. with the Adjoining
Territories,</q> 1794, pub. by H. D. Symonds; also a copy of the same published
by Smith, Reid and Wayland, in 1795; and <q>States of America,</q> by
J. Russell, London, C. Dilly and G. G. &amp; J. Robinson, 1799. The last map
gives the claims of the Ill., Wabash, and N. J. companies, respectively, the
others, the claims of the last two only. All references here given are to material
to be found in the libraries of the Chicago Historical Society and of the
State Hist. Soc. of Wis.</note> Thus far,
the Indians of the region had been undisturbed by white
occupation. British landholders were few and the French
clearings were too small to affect the hunting-grounds.
French and British alike were interested in the fur trade.
A French town was more suited to be the center of an
Indian community than to become a point on its periphery,
for here the Indians came for religious instruction, provisions,
fire-arms, and fire-water. The Illinois Indian of
1778 had been degraded rather than elevated by his contact
with the whites. The observation made by an acute
French woman of large experience, although made at
another time and place, was applicable here. She said
that it was much easier for a Frenchman to learn to live
like an Indian than for an Indian to learn to live like a
Frenchman.<note place='foot'>Mother Mary of the Incarnation, of Quebec, in 1668. In
<q>Glimpses of the Monastery.</q> <q>Scenes from the Hist. of the Ursulines
of Quebec,</q> 1639-1839, <q>by a Member of the Community,</q> 90. Charlevoix,
<q>Histoire de la Nouvelle-France,</q> III., 322, expressed a similar opinion in 1721, and
Collot, <q>Journey in N. A.,</q> I., 232-3, shows that the Illinois French of 1796-7
were a case in point.</note>
</p>

<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>

<p>
In point of numbers and of occupied territory, the French
population was trifling in comparison with the Indian. In
1766-67, the white inhabitants of the region were estimated
at about two thousand.<note place='foot'>Pittman, <q>European Settlements on the
Miss.,</q> 55. See pp. 42, 44, 45, 47, 48, for the settlement in detail.</note>
Some five years later,<note place='foot'>Hutchins, <q>Topographical Desc. of Va.,</q>
36-8.</note> Kaskaskia
was reported as having about five hundred white
and between four and five hundred black inhabitants;
Prairie du Rocher, one hundred whites and eighty negroes;
Fort Chartres, a very few inhabitants; St. Philips, two or
three families; and Cahokia, three hundred whites and
eighty negroes. At the same time, there was a village of
the Kaskaskia tribe with about two hundred and ten persons,
including sixty warriors, three miles north of Kaskaskia,
and a village of one hundred and seventy warriors
of the Peoria and Mitchigamia Indians, one mile northwest
of Fort Chartres. It is said of these Indians: <q>They were
formerly brave and warlike, but are degenerated into a
drunken and debauched tribe, and so indolent, as scarcely
to procure a sufficiency of Skins and Furrs to barter for
clothing,</q> and a pastoral letter of August 7, 1767, from the
Bishop of Quebec to the inhabitants of Kaskaskia shows
the character of the French. The French are told that
if they will not acknowledge the authority of the vicar-general&mdash;Father
Meurin, pastor of Cahokia&mdash;cease to marry
without the intervention of the priest, and cease to absent
themselves from church services, they will be abandoned
by the bishop as unworthy of his care.<note place='foot'><q>Mandements
des Evêques de Quebec,</q> II., 1741-1806, 205-6.</note> Two years earlier,
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
George Croghan had visited Vincennes, of which he wrote:
<q>I found a village of about eighty or ninety French families
settled on the east side of this river [Wabash], being
one of the finest situations that can be found.... The
French inhabitants, hereabouts, are an idle, lazy people, a
parcel of renegadoes from Canada, and are much worse
than the Indians.</q><note place='foot'>Thwaites, <q>Early Western Travels,</q>
I., 141, reprint of Croghan's Jour.</note> Although slave-holders, a large proportion
of the French were almost abjectly poor. Illiteracy
was very common as is shown by the large proportion
who signed legal documents by their marks.<note place='foot'><q>Chicago Hist. Soc.
Coll.,</q> IV., 165; <q>Ind. Hist Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 513-4.</note> The people
had been accustomed to a paternal rule and had not
become acquainted with English methods during the few
years of British rule. Such deeds as were given during
the French period were usually written upon scraps of
paper, described the location of the land deeded either
inaccurately or not at all, and were frequently lost.<note place='foot'><q>Public
Lands,</q> I., 10.</note> Land holdings were in long narrow strips along the
rivers.<note place='foot'>Two of the many maps illustrating this are in
<q>Pub. Lands,</q> II., facing
183, 195. A number of maps in Hopkins', <q>The Home Lots of the Early
Settlers of the Providence Plantations,</q> especially the one following page 17,
show that the same form of holdings existed in Providence, R. I. For reasons
for this form, see the note by Emma Helen Blair, in Thwaites', <q>Jesuit Relations,</q>
IV., 268-9. Stiles, <q>Ancient Windsor,</q> I., 149, has a map showing
such holdings in Windsor, Conn., 1633-1650.</note>
</p>

<p>
The country was physically in a state of almost primeval
simplicity. The chief highways were the winding rivers,
although roads, likewise winding, connected the various
settlements. These roads were impassable in times of
much rain. All settlements were near the water, living on
a prairie being regarded as impossible and living far from
a river as at least impracticable.<note place='foot'>Monroe, <q>Writings,</q> I., 117;
<q>Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 483-92; Hutchins, <q>Topographical Desc. of Va.,</q>
map facing 41; Collot, <q>A
Journey in N. A.,</q> I., 239-42, describes the roads in Illinois in 1796, and
plate 28 of the accompanying atlas gives an excellent map,
<hi rend='italic'>q. v.</hi> in pocket.</note> The difficulties of
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
George Rogers Clark in finding his way, overland, from the
Ohio River to Kaskaskia and Vincennes on his awful winter
march, are such as must manifestly have confronted anyone
who wished to go over the same routes at the same
season of the year.
</p>

<p>
Wild animals were abundant. A quarter of a century
after the Revolution, two hunters killed twenty-five deer
before nine in the morning near the Illinois settlements.<note place='foot'><q>Draper
Coll., Ill. MSS.,</q> 99.</note>
In 1787, the country between Vincennes and Kaskaskia
abounded in buffalo, deer, and bear.<note place='foot'>Harmar to Sec.
of War from Fort Harmar, Nov. 24, 1787&mdash;<q>St.
Clair Papers,</q> II., 30-1.</note> For years, the chase
furnished a large part of the provisions. The raising of
hogs was rendered difficult by the presence of wolves.
Game-birds were plentiful, and birds were sometimes a
pest because of their destruction of corn and smaller grains
and even of mast.
</p>

<p>
An early traveler wrote in 1796: <q>The province of the
Illinois is, perhaps, the only spot respecting which travelers
have given no exaggerated accounts; it is superior to any
description which has been made, for local beauty, fertility,
climate, and the means of every kind which nature
has lavished upon it for the facility of commerce.</q><note place='foot'>Collot,
<q>A Journey in N. A.,</q> I., 233.</note> The
wide-spreading prairies added to the beauty of the
country. Land which now produces one hundred bushels
of corn to the acre must have been capable of producing
wonderful crops at the beginning of its cultivation. Coal
was not known to exist in great quantities in the region
nor was its use as a fuel yet known.
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
Such was the country and such the people now organized
into the County of Illinois.<note place='foot'>At the November session
of 1738, Virginia had formed the County of
Augusta, which technically included the Illinois country&mdash;<q>Hening's Statutes,</q>
V., 78-80. For a map, see Waddell, <q>Annals of Augusta Co., Va.,</q>
frontispiece.</note> The Act establishing the
county provided that the governor and council should
appoint a county-lieutenant or commandant-in-chief,
who should appoint and commission as many deputy-commandants,
militia officers, and commissaries as were
needed. The religion, civil rights, property and law of
the inhabitants should be respected. The people of the
county should pay the salaries of such officers as they had
been accustomed to, but officers with new duties, including
the county-lieutenant, were to be paid by Virginia. The
governor and council might send five hundred troops, paid
by Virginia, to defend Illinois. Courts were to be established
with judges elected by the people, although the
judges of other county-courts of Virginia were appointed
by the governor and council.<note place='foot'><q>Hening's Statutes,</q>
IX., 117, 552-5; V., 489, 491.</note>
</p>

<p>
While Gov. Patrick Henry was writing instructions concerning
the organization of government in Illinois, the
British general, Hamilton, was marching to take Vincennes.
Henry did not know this particular fact, but he
had a keen perception of the difficulties, both civil and
military, which awaited the county. On December 12,
1778, without waiting for the formal signing of the act
creating the county, he wrote instructions to George
Rogers Clark, to Col. John Todd, jr., and to Lieut.-Col.
John Montgomery. Clark was instructed to retain the
command of the troops then in the Illinois country, and
to assume command of five other companies, soon to be
sent out.<note place='foot'>Henry, <q>Life of Patrick Henry,</q> III.,
209-18.</note> Col. Todd was appointed county-lieutenant or
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
commandant. His instructions contained much wise
direction. He was to take care to cultivate and conciliate
the affections of the French and Indians, to coöperate with
Clark and give the military department all the aid possible,
to use the French against the British, if the French
were willing, but otherwise to remain on the defensive, to
inculcate in the people an appreciation of the value of
liberty, to see that the inhabitants had justice done them
for any injuries from the troops. A neglect of this last
instruction, it was pointed out, might be fatal. <q>Consider
yourself as at the head of the civil department, and as
such having the command of the militia, who are not to
be under the command of the military, until ordered
out by the civil authority and act in conjunction with
them.</q> An express was to be sent to Virginia every
three months with a report. A letter to the Spanish
commandant at Ste. Genevieve was inclosed, and Todd
was told to be very friendly to him.<note place='foot'><p><q>Cal. of
Va. State Papers,</q> I., 312-14.
</p>
<p>
Col. John Todd, jr., was born March 27, 1750, in Pennsylvania. He was
well educated by his uncle in Virginia, in which state young Todd practised
law for some years. In 1775, he was one of the representatives chosen at the
call of the proprietors of Transylvania to form an ultra-constitutional government
for that new settlement. In 1777, he was one of the first two
burgesses from the county of Kentucky. He was killed at the Battle of the
Blue Licks, August 19, 1782. For biographical sketches see John Mason
Brown, <q>Oration at the Centennial of the Battle of the Blue Licks,</q> 27-31;
<q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 285-8; Green, <q>Historic Families of
Ky.,</q> 211; White, <q>Descendants of John Walker,</q> 56; <q>Filson Club
Pub.</q> VI., 27-8; Morehead, <q>Settlement of Ky.,</q> 174. Morehead's facts
were from R. Wickliffe, Todd's son-in-law, but this fact loses its significance
from the circumstance that Todd's only living child was of posthumous birth.</p></note>
Col. Montgomery, then in Virginia, was ordered to recruit men to reënforce
Clark. <q>As soon as the state of affairs in the recruiting
business will permit, you are to go to the Illinois country
&amp; join Col. Clarke, I need not tell you how necessary
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
the greatest possible Dispatch is to the good of the service
in which you are engaged. Our party at Illinois may be
lost, together with the present favorable Disposition of the
French and Indians there, unless every moment is improved
for their preservation, &amp; no future opportunity, if the
present is lost, can ever be expected so favorable to the
Interest of the commonwealth.</q> Montgomery was urged
not to be daunted by the inclement season, the great distance
to Illinois, the <q>want of many necessaries,</q> or opposition
from enemies.<note place='foot'>Henry, <q>Life of Patrick Henry,</q> III.,
216-18.</note> Gov. Henry deserves much credit
for his prompt and aggressive action at a time when
Virginia was in the very midst of the Revolution.
</p>

<p>
Col. Clark was much pleased with the appointment of
Col. Todd, both because civil duties were irksome to the
conqueror and because of his confidence in Todd's
ability.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 237.</note>
Upon the arrival of the new county-lieutenant, Clark
called a meeting of the citizens of Kaskaskia to meet the
new officer and to elect judges. He introduced Col. Todd
as governor and said that he was the only person in the state
whom he had desired for the place. The people were told
that the government, Virginia, was going to send a
regiment of regular troops for their defense, that the new
governor would arrange and settle their affairs, and that
they would soon become accustomed to the American
system of government. In regard to the election of
judges, Clark said: <q>I pray you to consider the importance
of this choice; to make it without partiality, and to
choose the persons most worthy of such posts.</q><note place='foot'><q>Draper Coll.,
Clark MSS.,</q> XLIX., 43, original MS. in French.</note> The
nine members of the court of Kaskaskia, the seven members
of the court of Cahokia, and the nine members of
the court of Vincennes, as also the respective clerks were
French. Of the three sheriffs, Richard Winston, sheriff
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
of Kaskaskia, was the only one who was not French.<note place='foot'><q>Chicago
Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 295.</note>
</p>

<p>
Military commissions were promptly made out, those
of the districts of Kaskaskia and Cahokia being dated
May 14, 1779. So many of the persons elected judges
were also given military commissions that it seems probable
that the supply of suitable men was small. No fewer
than fourteen such cases occur. Of the militia officers
appointed at Vincennes, P. Legras, appointed lieutenant-colonel,
had been a major in the British service, and F.
Bosseron, appointed major, had been a captain in the
British service.<note place='foot'><p><q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q>
IV., 294-6, 418; <q>Mich. Pioneer Coll.,</q>
IX., 498.
</p>
<p>
A Mr. Winston, probably Richard, was in Illinois in 1770, and was
regarded as an authority on the prices of cattle, as is shown by the court
records. In 1773, upon the occasion of the purchase of land from the Kaskaskia
Indians, by the Illinois Land Company, Richard Winston was at
Kaskaskia, and interpreted in French to the illiterate Indian interpreter of
His Majesty what the company desired to say to the Indians&mdash;<q>Chicago
Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 435; <q>An Account of the Proceedings of the Ill. and
Ouabache Land Companies,</q> 1796, 14. Richard Winston was one of the
original Indiana Company&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q> VI., 18, 35.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
The position of Illinois among the counties of Virginia
was necessarily anomalous. All counties, except the
County of Illinois, were asked to furnish one twenty-fifth
of their militia to defend the state. Illinois county was
omitted from the western counties enumerated in <q>An act
for adjusting and settling the titles of claimers to unpatented
lands under the present and former government,
previous to the establishment of the commonwealth's land
office.</q> Settlers northwest of the Ohio were warned to
remove. No settlement would be permitted there, and if
attempted, the intruder might be removed by force&mdash;<q><emph>Provided</emph>,
That nothing herein contained shall be construed
in any manner to injure or affect any French,
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
Canadian, or other families, or persons heretofore actually
settled in or about the villages near or adjacent to the
posts reduced by the forces of this state.</q> These exceptions
were made at the May session of 1779. At this
session, there was passed an act for raising one troop of
cavalry, consisting of one captain, one lieutenant, one
cornet, and thirty-two privates to defend the inhabitants
of Illinois county. All officers were to be appointed by
the governor and council. The men were to receive the
same pay as Continentals. Any soldier who would serve
in Illinois during the war should receive a bounty of seven
hundred and fifty dollars and a grant of one hundred
acres of land.<note place='foot'><q>Hening's Statutes,</q> X., 26, 32, 43, 161.</note>
</p>

<p>
Acting upon the policy that caused Virginia to warn all
intruders not to settle northwest of the Ohio, Todd issued
a proclamation warning all persons against such settlement,
<q>unless in manner and form as heretofore made by
the French inhabitants.</q> All inhabitants were ordered to
file a description of lands held by them, together with a
deed or deposition, in order to be ready for the press of
adventurers that was expected.<note place='foot'><q>Chicago Hist. Soc.
Coll.,</q> IV., 301; <q>Pub. Lands,</q> I., 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some of the incidents of the summer of 1779 indicate
difficulties of the new government. When the governor
was to be absent for a short time, he wrote to Winston,
who as commander of Kaskaskia would be acting governor,
telling him not to impress property, and by all
means to keep up a good understanding with Col. Clark
and the officers. The judges of the court at Kaskaskia
were ordered to hold court <q>at the usual place of holding
court ... any adjournment to the contrary notwithstanding.</q>
Richard McCarty, of Cahokia, wrote to the county-lieutenant
complaining that the writer's stock had been
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
killed by the French inhabitants. McCarty had allowed
his stock to run at large and they had destroyed uninclosed
crops, which crops, he contended, were not in their
proper place. Two months later, McCarty wrote from
Cahokia: <q>Col. Todd residence hear will spoil the people
intirely. I think it would be a happy thing could we get
Colo<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>l</hi>
Todd out of the country for he will possitively sett
the Inhabitants and us by the Ears. I have wrote him a
pritty sharp Letter on his signing a Death warrant against
my poor hog's for runing in the Oppen fields ...
on some complaints by the Inhabitants the other day he
wished that there was not a Soldier in the country.</q><note place='foot'><p>Todd to
Winston, June 15, 1779&mdash;<q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV.,
302; Todd to Judges at Kaskaskia, July 31, 1779&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 304;
McCarty to Todd, from Cahokia, July 18, 1779&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XLIX.,
72, original MS.; McCarty to Montgomery, from Cahokia, Sept. 19,
1779,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
XLIX., 71, original MS.
</p>
<p>
Richard McCarty had been a resident of Cahokia under British rule and
had warned the British against American encroachments. He was licensed
to trade by the county government upon the recommendation of the court of
the District of Cahokia, June 5, 1779&mdash;<q>Mich. Pioneer Coll.,</q> IX., 368,
383; <q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 296-7-8.</p></note>
McCarty's hogs were not his only trouble. A fellow-officer
wrote: <q>I received a line from Capt. McCarty [captain
of troops at Cahokia] yesterday. He is well. He
writes to me that he has lost most of his French soldiers,
and that the inhabitants are so saucy that they threaten to
drive him and his soldiers away, telling him that he has
no business there&mdash;nobody sent for him. They are very
discontented. The civil law has ruined them.</q><note place='foot'>Capt. John
Williams to G. R. Clark, from Fort Clark, Kaskaskia,
Sept. 25, 1779&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XLIX., 73, original MS.</note>
</p>

<p>
Col. Todd's position was difficult because of the discontent
prevailing among both the French and the Americans
in Illinois. His salary was so small that he feared that he
must sell his property in Kentucky to support himself
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
while in public service. He regarded Kentucky as a
much better place than Illinois for the ambitious man, the
retired farmer, or the young merchant.<note place='foot'>Todd
to Col. Will Fleming, senator from Botetourt, from Kaskaskia,
Aug. 18, 1779&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XXIII, 103, original MS.</note> He
had been scarcely more than three months in office when he wrote
to the governor of Virginia: <q>I expected to have been prepared
to present to your excellency some amendments
upon the form of Government for Illinois, but the present
will be attended with no great inconveniences till the
Spring Session, when I beg your permission to attend and
get a Discharge from an Office, which an unwholesome air,
a distance from my connexions, a Language not familiar
to me, and an impossibility of procuring many of the conveniences
of Life suitable; all tend to render uncomfortable.</q><note place='foot'>Todd
to Gov. of Va., from Kaskaskia, Aug. 18, 1779&mdash;<q>Chicago Hist.
Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 319.</note>
This letter was intercepted by the British and did
not reach the governor.
</p>

<p>
Great difficulty was experienced in securing supplies for
the soldiers. At times, both troops and people suffered
from lack of clothing. The Spanish refused to allow the
Americans to navigate the Mississippi, Virginia money
entirely lost its credit, hard money was scarce, and peltry
was difficult for the military commissaries to obtain. Col.
Todd, in desperation, refused to allow the commander at
Kaskaskia to pay the people peltry for provisions as had
been promised, and calling the inhabitants in council, he
told them that if they would not sell on the credit of the
state they would be subject to military discipline.<note place='foot'><p>Capt.
John Williams to Col. Wm. Preston, from Ft. Clark, Kaskaskia,
Sept. 20, 1779&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Preston Papers.</q> V., 9, original MS.
</p>
<p>
Montgomery to Clark, from Ft. Clark, Kaskaskia, Oct. 5,
1779&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
<q>Clark MSS.,</q> XLIX., 78, original MS.</p></note> The
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
fall of 1779 saw the garrison at Vincennes without salt,
and starving; while at Kaskaskia the money was worthless,
troops were without clothes and deserting daily.<note place='foot'>Shelby
to Clark, from Vincennes, Oct. 10, 1779&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XLIX., 79,
original MS.; Montgomery to Clark, from Ft. Clark, Kaskaskia, Nov. 15,
1779&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XLIX., 85, original MS.</note>
This great lack of supplies resulted in the impressment of
supplies, in disagreement among the officers, and was a
prominent factor in a resolution to withdraw the troops
from their several situations and concentrate them at a
single point on the Ohio River. The discontent of the
French was extreme, and it was increased by the departure
of Col. Todd for Virginia. The officers who were left in
command ruled with a rod of iron and took cattle, flour,
wood, and other necessaries, without payment.<note place='foot'><p>Montgomery
to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Feb. 1, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper Coll.
Clark MSS.,</q> L., 9, original MS.; Clark to Todd, from Louisville, March,
1780&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q> I., 338-9; John McArthur from Ste.
Genevieve, Mo., Oct. 22, 1883&mdash;<q>Draper Coll. Clark MSS.,</q> VIII., 27.
</p>
<p>
I have been unable to determine just when Col. Todd left Illinois, whether
he resigned as county-lieutenant, and whether he again returned. Boyd in
his article in the <q>Am. Hist. Rev.,</q> IV., says that he left in 1780, resigned
in the same year, and apparently did not return. Mason, in <q>Chicago Hist.
Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 287, says that he seems to have left in 1779, seems not to
have resigned, and not to have returned. Wickliffe, in Morehead, <q>Settlement
of Ky.,</q> 174, implies that he did not resign, and says that he several
times revisited the county. No one of these writers gives any authority for
his statement and I have found none. It is certain that Todd was at the
Falls of Ohio on December 23, 1779; that he then wrote to the governor of
Virginia expressing his intention of resigning; that the governor, Jefferson,
strongly opposed his resigning&mdash;<q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 359; that
he left some peltry in the joint care of his subordinates, Montgomery and
Winston, in November, 1779; that goods were said to be consigned to him as
county-lieutenant of Illinois in November, 1780; that he wrote <q>I still receive
complaints from the Illinois,</q> on April 15, 1781; that on April 29, 1781,
Winston was referred to as <q>Deputy County-Lieutenant for the Illinois
County;</q> and that Thimothé Demunbrunt signed as <q>Lt. Comd. par interim,
&amp;c.</q> in February and again in March, 1782&mdash;<q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q>
IV., 315-16, 335, 343, 359; <q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> III., 40-4.</p></note>
Capt.
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
Dodge, of Kaskaskia, refused to honor a draft presented,
apparently, by the government of Virginia, and when sued
in the civil court, he declared that he had nothing but his
body and that could not be levied upon; besides, he was
an officer and as such was not amenable to civil law.<note place='foot'>Edward
Murray to &mdash;&mdash;, from Kaskaskia, Apr. 19, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XLVI., 52, original MS. John Dodge had
been an Indian trader between Detroit and Pittsburg. He was captured by the
British, but escaped on Oct. 9, 1778, after thirty-three months detention. Washington
recommended him to Congress as a man who would be useful because of
his knowledge of the country&mdash;<q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> VI., 153-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the very midst of starvation, the French, unaccustomed
to English ways, were wishing to increase the
expense of government. An unsigned official letter says,
in speaking of affairs in Illinois: <q>I find that justices of
the peace, appointed among them, expect to be paid, this
not being the practice under our laws, there is no provision
for it. Would it not be expedient to restrain these
appointments to a very small number, and for these (if it
be necessary) to require small contributions either from
the litigants or the people at large, as you find would be
most agreeable. In time, I suppose even this might be
discontinued. The Clerks &amp; Sheriffs perhaps may be
paid, as with us, only converting Tobacco fees into their
worth in peltry. As to the rules of decision &amp; modes of
proceding, I suppose ours can be only gradually introduced.
It would be well to get their militia disciplined by
calling them regularly together according to our usage; however, all this
can only be recommended to your Discretion.</q><note place='foot'>Unsigned and
unaddressed, from <q>Williamsburg, Jan. 28, 1780</q>&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> I., 5, original MS.</note>
Some eight years later the exaction of exorbitant
fees was one of the chief reasons which caused the
reform of the French court at Vincennes.<note place='foot'>Hamtramck to
Harmar, from Vincennes, Apr. 13, 1788&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> I., 386-7.</note>
</p>

<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>

<p>
The plan for concentrating most of the Illinois troops at
a single point was carried out in the spring of 1780. The
chief objects sought were to procure supplies and to prevent
the advance of the Spaniards. At first, it was
thought advisable to locate the new fort on the north side
of the Ohio near the Mississippi, and Col. Todd made
some grants of land to such persons as were willing to
settle in the vicinity and assist in raising provisions, but
the fact that Virginia currency, although refused in Illinois,
was accepted in Kentucky caused the fort to be built
south of the Ohio, and it is probable that Todd's grants of
land at the site first proposed lapsed.<note place='foot'><p>Clark to
Todd from Louisville, Mar., 1780&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State
Papers,</q> I., 338-9; <hi rend='italic'>see also</hi> pp. 358, 360.
</p>
<p>
Unsigned and unaddressed official letter, from Williamsburg, Jan. 28,
1780&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> L., 5, original MS.</p></note>
As the troops had
a great need for settlers to raise crops, Capt. Dodge suggested
to the governor of Virginia that immigrants to Illinois
should receive aid from Virginia. This would aid the
troops and would stop emigration to the Spanish possessions
west of the Mississippi.<note place='foot'>Dodge to Gov. of Va., from
Ft. Jefferson, Aug. 1, 1780&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va.
State Papers,</q> I., 368.</note>
</p>

<p>
As the French could neither support the soldiers nor do
without them, commissions in blank were sent to Maj.
Bosseron, district commandant at Vincennes, with power
to raise a company there, and to assure the company that
pay would be allowed by the government. It was feared
that the settlers at Vincennes would consider themselves
abandoned upon the withdrawal of troops. It was proposed
to leave enough troops among the French to satisfy
them, but scarcely had the new fort been established when
the people of Cahokia sent a special messenger to Clark
at Fort Jefferson, the new fort, asking that troops be sent
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
to protect them. The Indians so surround the place, say
the petitioners, that the fields can not be cultivated. If
troops are sent the people can not feed them, but if they
are not sent the people can not long feed themselves.<note place='foot'>Todd
to Gov. Jefferson, from Richmond, June 2, 1780&mdash;<q>Cal. of
Va. State Papers,</q> I., 358; Address from the people of Cahokia to G. R.
Clark, April 11, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> L., 27, original MS. in
French.</note>
French creditors of the government were unpaid and some
of them must have been in sore need.<note place='foot'>Legras to
Clark, from Vincennes, Aug. 1, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark
MSS.,</q> L., 54, original MS. in French.</note>
</p>

<p>
The act establishing the County of Illinois would terminate
by limitation at the end of the May session of
1780, unless renewed. At that session, the act was
renewed <q>for one year after the passing of this act, and
from thence to the end of the next session of assembly.</q><note place='foot'><q>Hening's
Statutes,</q> X., 303, 388-9.</note>
</p>

<p>
The condition of the people in the county during the
latter half of 1780 was one of misery. Contemporary
accounts have a melancholy interest. An attack by
Indians upon Fort Jefferson being imminent, the few
troops in the outlying districts were ordered to come to
the aid of the garrison. The order reached Cahokia when
its few defenders were sick and starving. Corn, without
grease or salt, was their only food. Deaths were of frequent
occurrence. The people of the village had petitioned
Col. Montgomery to ease their burden by quartering some
of the troops in other villages, but he refused the request
of other officers for a council and threatened to abandon
the country entirely. In such a condition of affairs, Capt.
McCarty proceeded to obey the orders from Fort Jefferson.
The only boats at the disposal of the garrison were unseaworthy,
so five small boats were pressed for use. On the
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
way, several of the famished soldiers became so sick that
they had to be left along the route. Even military discipline
was bad in the country. Capt. McCarty, upon being
arrested for having quarreled with Dodge, because the
latter would not buy food for the starving troops, was left
for months without trial because Col. Montgomery had
left the country and a military court could not be convened.<note place='foot'>Extract
from McCarty's journal, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 14, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> L., 66; McCarty to Col. Slaughter, Jan. 27,
1781&mdash;<q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> III., 1, 2; incomplete in <q>Cal. of Va.
State Papers.</q> I., 465; Montgomery to McCarty, between Aug. 27 and Aug.
30, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> L., 66, 68; <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
L., 70, original MS.</note>
In October, McCarty wrote: <q>In short, we are
become the hated beasts of a whole people by pressing
horses, boats, &amp;c., &amp;c., &amp;c., killing cattle, &amp;c., &amp;c., for
which no valuable consideration is given; even many not a
certificate, which is here looked upon as next to nothing.</q><note place='foot'>McCarty
to Todd, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 14, 1780&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State
Papers,</q> L., 380.</note>
</p>

<p>
Of the same tenor as McCarty's testimony to Illinois
conditions is that of Winston. A remonstrance of the
civil authorities against the extravagance of the military
officers was treated as insolent and impertinent. The
military power refused the civil department the use of the
military prison, even when pay was offered, and made
strenuous efforts to establish military rule. Col. Montgomery
and Capt. Brashears had departed for New
Orleans without settling the account for the peltry which
Todd had committed to the joint care of Montgomery
and Winston. Montgomery was openly accused of having
taken a large amount of public property away with him.
Capt. Dodge was a notorious disturber of the peace, and
Capt. Bentley, a more recent arrival, was equally undesirable.
In the closing paragraph of a long letter is the
significant statement: <q>It Being so long a time since we
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
had any news from you, we conclude therefrom that the
Government has given us up to do for Ourselves the Best
we can, untill such time as it pleases Some other State or
Power to take us under their Protection&mdash;a few lines
from you would give Some of us great satisfaction, yett
the Generality of the People are of Opinion that this
Country will be given up to France....</q><note place='foot'>Winston to Todd, from
Kaskaskia, Oct. 24, 1780&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State
Papers,</q> I., 380-2.</note>
</p>

<p>
At the close of October, the troops, with the exception
of a very few, were collected at Fort Jefferson. There the
garrison was sick and starving,<note place='foot'>Winston to
Clark, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 24, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper Coll.,
Clark MSS.,</q> L., 71, original MS.; <q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> II.,
136-40; Helm to Slaughter, from Fort Jefferson, Oct. 29, 1780&mdash;<q>Cal. of
Va. State Papers,</q> I., 383; Williams to Clark, from Camp Jefferson, Oct. 28,
1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I., 383.</note> clothes were much needed,
desertion was rife, and the abandonment of the post
seemed imminent.<note place='foot'>Montgomery to Jefferson, from
New Orleans, Jan. 8, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal. of
Va. State Papers,</q> I., 424-5.</note> Among the few troops that were not
called to Fort Jefferson were those of Capt. Rogers, at
Kaskaskia. This company <q>had to impress supplies,
giving certificates for the value&mdash;thus would kill cattle
when they wanted them, hogs, &amp; take flour from the horse-mills&mdash;&amp;
thus lived very comfortably.</q><note place='foot'><q>Draper Coll.,
Clark MSS.,</q> VIII., 78.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mutual recrimination was common among the officers.
Todd, in a letter to Gov. Jefferson, in which he inclosed
letters from the Illinois officers, said: <q rend='pre'>Winston is commandant
at Kaskaskia; McCarty, a captain in the Illinois
regiment, who has long since rendered himself disagreeable
by endeavoring to enforce military law upon the civil
department at Kohos.</q>
</p>

<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>

<p>
<q>The peltry, mentioned by Winston as purloined or
embezzled by Montgomery, was committed to their joint
care by me in Nov<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi>, 1779; and from the circumstance
of Montgomery's taking up with an infamous girl, leaving his
wife, &amp; flying down the river, I am inclined to believe the
worst that can be said of him. Being so far out of the
road of business, I can not do the State that justice I
wish by sending down his case immediately to the Spanish
commandants on the Mississippi.</q><note place='foot'>Todd to
Gov. Jefferson, from Lexington, Ky., Jan. 24, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal.
of Va. State Papers,</q> I., 460.</note> From January 28,
1779, to October 18, 1780, Montgomery drew drafts upon
Virginia to the amount of thirty-nine thousand three
hundred twenty dollars.<note place='foot'><q>Draper's Notes,
Trip 1860,</q> II., 158.</note> Winston and McCarty accused
Capt. Rogers, who succeeded Col. Montgomery in command
at Kaskaskia, of shooting down the stock of the
inhabitants without warrant. In a dignified defence, Capt.
Rogers declared that he took only so much food as was
absolutely required to save his starving sick, and that Mr.
Bentley, who endeavored to secure supplies from the
people, offering his personal credit, was persistently opposed
by Winston and McCarty. <q>I can not conclude without
informing you that 'tis my positive opinion the people of
the Illinois &amp; Post Vincennes have been in an absolute
state of rebellion for these several months past, &amp; ought
to have no further indulgence shown them; and such is
the nature of those people, the more they are indulged,
the more turbulant they grow. I look upon it that Winston
and McCarty have been principal instruments to bring
them to the pitch they are now at.</q><note place='foot'>Rogers to
Gov. Jefferson, from Harrodsburg, Apr. 29, 1781&mdash;<q>Draper's
Notes, Trip 1860,</q> III., 40-4; incomplete in <q>Cal. of Va. State
Papers,</q> II., 76-7. Rogers refers to Winston as <q>Deputy County Lieutenant
for the Illinois County.</q> Who was county-lieutenant?</note> Capt. Dodge, against
whom complaints had become general, and Capt. McCarty,
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
whose quarrel has been narrated, were ordered to appear
before a court of inquiry at Fort Jefferson.<note place='foot'>Slaughter to
Gov. Jefferson, from Louisville, Jan. 14, 1781&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> LI., 12, original MS.; Maj. Williams's orders, endorsed
<q>pretended orders,</q> from Fort Clark, Kaskaskia, Feb. 12, 1781.</note> Clark was
very angry at Montgomery's conduct. He sent a message
to New Orleans ordering him to return for trial; he
warned all persons against trusting the offender on the
credit of the State, and he requested the governor of
Virginia to arrest the fugitive if he should come to Richmond.<note place='foot'>Clark
to Gov. of Va., from <q>Yough,</q> Mar. 27, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va.
State Papers,</q> I., 597.</note>
How low public morals had sunk is shown by the
fact that Montgomery had the effrontery to return to Fort
Jefferson, where he arrived on May 1, 1781, and resumed
his command. In February, 1783, he made his defense and
asked for his pay.<note place='foot'>Montgomery to Gov. of Va.,
from Falls of Ohio, Aug. 10, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal.
of Va. State Papers,</q> II., 313; Montgomery to the Board of Commissioners
for the Settlement of Western Accounts, from New Holland, Feb. 22,
1783&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
III., 441-4.</note> In April, 1781, Todd wrote: <q>I still receive
complaints from the Illinois. That Department suffers,
I fear, through the avarice and prodigality of our officers;
they all vent complaints against each other. I believe our
French friends have the justest grounds of dissatisfaction.</q><note place='foot'>Todd
to Gov. Jefferson, from Lexington, Ky., Apr. 15, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal.
of Va. State Papers,</q> II., 44-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
On June 2, 1781, Capt. McCarty was killed in a fight
between the Illinois troops and some Indians on the one
side and a party of Ouia Indians, who favored the British,
on the other. The engagement took place near the
Wabash. McCarty's papers were sent to the British, who
laconically reported: <q>They give no information other
than that himself and all the Inhabitants of the Illenoise
were heartily tired of the Virginians.</q><note place='foot'><q>Draper Coll.,
Clark MSS.,</q> LX., 17, No. 2; Maj. de Peyster to Brig.-Gen.
Powell, from Detroit, July 12, 1781&mdash;<q>Mich. Pioneer Coll.,</q> XIX.,
646.</note> There is slight
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
reason to doubt the truth of the statement. It is enforced
by the fact that in 1781, a letter written in French to the
governor of Virginia and said to be signed in the name of
the inhabitants of Vincennes and to give the views of the
people of Vincennes, Kaskaskia, Vermilion, Ouia, etc.,
declared that the French had decided to receive no troops
except those sent by the king of France to aid in defeating
the enemies of the country. The Indians who are
friendly to the French, said the writer, would regard the
coming of Virginia troops as a hostile act. A copy of the
memoir sent by the French settlers to the French minister
Luzerne was inclosed.<note place='foot'><q>Can. Archives,</q> Series
B., Vol. 182, 489; <q>Rept. on Can. Archives,</q>
1888, 882.</note>
</p>

<p>
On June 8, 1781, the garrison of Fort Jefferson, being
without food, without credit, and for more than two years
without pay, evacuated the place and withdrew to the
Falls of Ohio, only to find themselves without credit in
even the adjoining counties of Virginia. The troops were
billeted in small parties.<note place='foot'>Montgomery to
Gov. Nelson, from Falls of Ohio, Aug. 10, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal.
of Va. State Papers,</q> II., 313; Same to same, same
date&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 315.</note> Once again there comes a
despairing plea from the feeble garrison at Vincennes, in
the County of Illinois. The commander wrote: <q>Sir, I
must inform you once more that I can not keep garrison
any longer, without some speedy relief from you. My
men have been 15 days upon half-allowance; there is
plenty of provisions here but no credit&mdash;I can not press,
being the weakest party&mdash;Some of the Gentlemen
would help us, but their credit is as bad as ours, therefore,
if you have not provisions send us Whisky which will
answer as good an end.</q><note place='foot'>Capt. Bailey to
Col. Slaughter, from <q>Port Vincennes,</q> Aug. 6, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal.
of Va. State Papers,</q> II., 338.</note>
</p>

<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>

<p>
In the Virginia House of Delegates, a committee for
courts of justice reported that the laws which would
expire at the end of the session had been examined,
together with certain other laws, and that a series of resolutions
had been agreed upon by the committee. Among
these resolutions was the following: <q><hi rend='italic'>Resolved, That it is
the opinion of this committee</hi>, That the act of assembly,
passed in the year 1778, entitled <q>an act, for establishing
the county of Illinois, and for the more effectual protection
and defence thereof;</q> which was continued and
amended by a subsequent act, and will expire at the end
of this present session of assembly, ought to be further
continued.</q> This report was presented and the resolutions
agreed to by the House on November 22, 1781.
Three days later, a bill in accordance with the resolution
was presented. The consideration of the bill in a committee
of the whole House was postponed from day to day
until December 14, when it was considered and the
question being upon engrossment and advancement to a
third reading, it passed in the negative.<note place='foot'><q>Jour. H.
of Del.,</q> Va., Oct. Sess., 1781, 13-39.</note> On January 5,
1782, the General Assembly adjourned, and the County of
Illinois ceased to exist.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
72, 73, 74. Boyd states in <q>Am. Hist. Rev.,</q> IV., 632, 635, that
the county ceased to exist in 1781. This is erroneous. Mr. Boyd's article is
the most scholarly treatment of the County of Illinois which has been published.
Aside from the errors as to the time of the beginning and the ending
of the county, and doubtful statements as to Todd's leaving Illinois and
subsequently resigning, no errors of fact have been noted. A more complete,
but unpublished, article on the subject is by Dr. Edith
Lyle.</note> So far as instituting a civil
government was concerned, the county was a failure. Its
military history shows a mixture of American, British,
French, and Spanish efforts at mastery.
</p>

<p>
The first important military operation in which the
County of Illinois was concerned, after the well-known
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
movements of Clark and Hamilton, was organized by the
British at Detroit in compliance with a circular letter from
Lord George Germain. The plan was to attack St. Louis,
the French settlements near it on the east side of the
Mississippi, Vincennes, Fort Nelson at the falls of the
Ohio, and Kentucky. Large use was to be made of
Indians, and British emissaries were busy among the tribes
early in 1780. An expedition was to be led against
Kentucky, while diversions should be made at outlying
posts. It was thought that the reduction of St. Louis
would present little difficulty, because it was known to be
unfortified, and was reported to be garrisoned by but
twenty men. In addition to this, it was regarded as an
easy matter to use Indians against the place from the circumstance
that many Indians frequented it. Less assurance
was felt as to holding the place after it should have
been captured, and to make this easier, it was proposed to
appeal to the cupidity of the British fur traders. By the
middle of February, a war-party had been sent out from
Michilimackinac to arouse and act with the Sioux Indians,
and early the next month another party was sent out to
engage Indians to attack St. Louis and the Illinois towns.
Seven hundred and fifty traders, servants, and Indians
having been collected, on the 2d of May they started down
the Mississippi, and at the lead mines, near the present
Galena, seventeen Spanish and American prisoners were
taken. In conjunction with this expedition, another, with
a chosen band of Indians and French, was to advance by
way of Chicago and the Illinois River; a third was to
guard the prairies between the Wabash and the Illinois;
and the chief of the Sioux was to attack St. Genevieve and
Kaskaskia.<note place='foot'>Sinclair to Haldim, from
Michilimackinac, Feb. 17, 1780&mdash;<q>Mich.
Pioneer Coll.,</q> IX., 546; Same to same, May 29,
1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IX.,
548-9; Same to De Peyster, Feb. 15, 1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
XIX., 500-1; Same to Lt.-Col. Bolton, June 4,
1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XIX., 529; De Peyster to Lt.-Col.
Bolton, from Detroit, June 8, 1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XIX., 531-2;
McKee to De Peyster, June 4, 1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XIX., 530-1;
Bird to De Peyster, from <q>a day's march from the Ohio,</q> June 3,
1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XIX., 527-9.</note>
</p>

<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>

<p>
The expedition against St. Louis and the Illinois towns,
as well as in its larger aspect, was not successful. It was
impossible to keep it secret and as early as March, an
attack was expected. Spanish and Americans joined in
repulsing the intruders. Another potent element in the
failure was the treachery of some of the traders who acted
as leaders for the British, notably that of Ducharme and
Calvé, who had a lucrative trade and regarded the prospect
of increasing it by the proposed attack as doubtful.
In the last week of May, 1780, the attack on St. Louis was
made. Several persons were killed, but the place was not
taken. Cahokia was beleaguered for three days, but it
was so well defended by George Rogers Clark that on the
third night the enemy withdrew, when Clark hastened to
intercept the expedition against Kentucky, while the Illinois
and Spanish troops pursued the retreating enemy and
burned the towns of the Sauk and Fox Indians. The
British were much chagrined at the result of the expedition,
yet they resolved to continue their plan of using
Indians and sending out several parties at once.<note place='foot'>Sinclair
to Bolton, from Michilimackinac, July 4, 1780&mdash;<q>Mich. Pioneer
Coll.,</q> XIX., 529-30; Same to Haldimand, July 8,
1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IX., 558-9;
Same to same, May 29, 1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IX.,
548-9; Same to De Peyster, July 30, 1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IX.,
586; <q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XXVIII., No. 117, p. 6; Scharf to
Lyman C. Draper, from Baltimore, Dec. 16, 1882&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
p. 7; Capt. John Rogers' account&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 3; Capt.
John Murphy's account&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, VIII., 66-78;
See also <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XXVI., 18.</note>
</p>

<p>
An expedition which gains much interest from the character
of its leader was that of Col. Augustin Mottin de la
Balme. This man had been commissioned quartermaster
of gendarmerie, by the authorities of Versailles, in 1766;
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
had come to America and been recommended by Silas
Deane and Benjamin Franklin to the president of Congress,
John Hancock, as a man who would be of service in
training cavalry; had been breveted lieutenant-colonel of
cavalry, in May, 1777; made inspector of cavalry, with the
rank of colonel, in July following; and had resigned in October
of the same year. The next year, a public notice, in
French with English and German translations, announced
that carpenters, bakers, and some other classes of laborers
could find shelter and employment at a workshop
established by La Balme, twenty-eight miles from Philadelphia.<note place='foot'><q>Rept.
on Canadian Archives,</q> 1888, p. 904; <q>Mag. of Am. Hist.,</q>
III., 366.</note>
In the summer of 1780, La Balme went from
Fort Pitt to the Illinois country.
</p>

<p>
A contemporary who writes from Vincennes speaks of
La Balme as a French colonel. He was regarded by the
Americans with much suspicion. Capt. Dalton, the American
commander at Vincennes, whose character was later
much questioned, allowed him to go among the Indians,<note place='foot'>Bentley
to Clark, from Vincennes, July 30, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark
MSS.,</q> L., 51. A copy, incomplete and not exact, is in
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XXVI., 85.</note>
whereupon La Balme advised them to send word to the
tribes which Clark was preparing to attack and to warn
them of their danger. La Balme also ingratiated himself
with the discontented French, asking why they did not
drive <q>these vagabonds,</q> the American soldiers, away, and
saying that to refuse to furnish provisions was the most
efficient method. <q>Everything he advances tends to
advance the French interest and depreciate the American.
The people here are easily misled; buoy'd up with the
flattering hopes of being again subject to the king of
France, he could easily prevail on them to drive every
American out of the Place and this appears to me to be
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
his Plan.</q> After thoroughly stirring up the people at
Vincennes, the adventurer left, with an escort of thirty
French and Indians, to visit Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and
St. Louis. He and Col. Montgomery, then the superior
officer in Illinois, did not meet, and he received not the
slightest countenance from the Spanish commandant at
St. Louis. By the French inhabitants, La Balme <q>was
received ... just as the Jews would receive the
Messiah&mdash;was conducted from the post here [at Kaskaskia]
by a large detachment of the inhabitants as well as
different tribes of Indians.</q> The French in the towns
near the Mississippi were so enthusiastic that La Balme
had little difficulty in raising forty or fifty troops for an
expedition against Detroit. Some of the American
soldiers at Cahokia deserted to him, and when placed
under arrest by the military authorities were rescued by a
mob. On October 5, 1780, after telling the Indians to be
quiet because they would see the French in Illinois in the
spring, the French troops set out from Cahokia.<note place='foot'>Extracts
from Capt. McCarty's Journal, at Kaskaskia&mdash;<q>Draper Coll.,
Clark MSS.,</q> XXVI., 85-6; McCarty to Todd, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 14,
1780&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q> I., 380; Winston to Todd, from Kaskaskia,
Oct. 24, 1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I., 381-2; Auguste St. Jemme, son of an
inhabitant of Kaskaskia, to Lyman C. Draper&mdash;<q>Draper's Notes,
Trip 1851,</q> I., 48-9&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XXVI., 82.</note>
</p>

<p>
The troops from Illinois were to be joined by a body
from Vincennes, but without waiting for them La Balme
pushed on to the Miami towns, where he hoped to capture
a British Indian trader who was especially hated by the
French. The trader was not found, but his store of goods
to the amount of one hundred horse-loads was seized.
The expected reinforcements not arriving, La Balme felt
too weak to attack Detroit and started to return. He was
attacked by the Indians on the river Aboite, eleven miles
southwest of the present Fort Wayne, and he and some
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
thirty of his men were killed and at least one hundred
horses, richly laden with plunder, were taken by the
Indians. It was reported that disaffected inhabitants of
Detroit had concealed five hundred stands of arms with
which to assist the forces of La Balme in taking the place.
Among La Balme's papers, which fell into the hands of the
British and are now in the Canadian archives, were
addresses, in French, by M. Mottin de la Balme, French
colonel, etc., to the French settled on the Mississippi, dated
St. Louis, September 17, 1780; a declaration, in French,
in the name of the inhabitants of the village of Cahokia,
addressed to La Balme: <q>We unanimously request you to
listen with a favorable ear to the declaration which we
venture to present to you, touching all the bad treatment
we have suffered patiently since the Virginian troops unfortunately
arrived amongst us till now,</q> dated Cahokia,
September 21, 1780; a note from F. Trottier, a member
of the court of Cahokia, elected under the Virginia government,
to La Balme, saying that no meeting can be held
until Sunday next, when he hopes the young men will
show themselves worthy the high idea La Balme has of
them, but that at present there are only twelve entirely
determined to follow him wherever he goes, although
others may follow their example, and asking La Balme
to receive depositions against the Virginians, dated
Cahokia, September 27, 1780; a petition, in French,
addressed to the Chevalier de la Luzerne, minister plenipotentiary
from France to the United States, by inhabitants
of Post Vincennes, dated Vincennes, August 22, 1780;
and a commission to Augustin Mottin de la Balme as
quartermaster of gendarmèrie, dated Versailles, February
23, 1766.<note place='foot'>De Peyster to Powell, from Detroit, Nov. 13,
1780&mdash;<q>Mich. Pioneer Coll.,</q> XIX., 581; Same to Haldimand,
Nov. 16, 1780&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, X., 448-9;
Linctot to Slaughter, <q>O'Post,</q> Jan. 11, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q>
I., 429; J. L. William to Lyman C. Draper, from Fort Wayne, Ind.,
Oct. 1, 1881&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XXVI., 92; McCarty to
Slaughter, from Ill., Jan. 27, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers</q> I., 465;
Col. Brodhead to Washington, from Fort Pitt, Mar. 10, 1781, <q>Olden
Time,</q> II., 391; Col. Levin Powell, from Harrodsburg, Jan. 21, 1781&mdash;<q>Pa.
Archives,</q> VIII., 768; De Peyster to Haldimand, from Detroit, Nov.
13, 1780, Farmer, <q>Hist. of Detroit and Michigan,</q> 257; Letter from J.
M. P. Legras, from Vincennes, Dec. 1, 1780&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q>
L., 77, original corrected draft; <q>Rept. on Canadian Archives,</q> 1888,
904-5; extract from <q>Scot's Magazine,</q> May, 1781, in <q>Draper Coll., Clark
MSS.,</q> XXVI., 82. Whether La Balme had any countenance from either
the French government or its representatives is an unsettled question. That
France should regain her hold in America was desired by many Frenchmen,
but on the other hand, the French government was pledged by its treaty of
alliance to make no acquisitions of territory in America. The following
references raise the question, but I know of none which settle it: Kingsford,
<q>Canada,</q> VI., 342-3; Sparks, <q>Washington,</q> VI., 106 ff., 113; Stevens,
<q>Facsimiles,</q> XVII., No. 1609; <q>Secret Jour. of Cong.,</q> II.,
111-117, 125.</note> The British promptly set about promoting the
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
Indian trader whom La Balme and the French had sought
to kill, believing that he would be serviceable as a spy.<note place='foot'>Haldimand
to De Peyster, from Quebec, Jan. 6, 1781&mdash;<q>Mich. Pioneer
Coll.,</q> IX., 641.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the autumn of 1780, a party of seventeen men from
Cahokia went on an expedition against St. Josephs. The
party was commanded by <q>a half Indian,</q> and seems to
have included but one American. The attack was so
timed as to come when the Indians in the vicinity of St.
Josephs were out hunting. The place was taken without
difficulty, the traders of the place were captured and plundered,
and the party, laden with booty, set out on the
route to Chicago. A pursuing party was quickly organized
and at the <hi rend='italic'>Rivière du Chemin</hi>, a small stream in Indiana,
emptying into the southeastern part of Lake Michigan,
the returning victors were summoned to surrender, on
December 5, 1780. Upon their refusal, four were killed,
two wounded, seven made prisoners, while three escaped.<note place='foot'>This
amounts to but sixteen men. De Peyster says that the party was
one of sixteen; McCarty says there were seventeen.</note>
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
The one American, Brady, was among the prisoners. He
told the British that the party was sent by the creoles to
plunder St. Josephs, and that there was not a Virginian in
all the Illinois country, including Vincennes.<note place='foot'>McCarty to
Slaughter, from Ill., Jan. 27, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State
Papers,</q> I., 465; Sinclair to Mathews, from Michilimackinac, Feb.
23, 1781&mdash;<q>Mich. Pioneer Coll.,</q> IX., 629; De Peyster to Powell, from
Detroit, Jan. 8, 1781&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XIX., 591-2; Same
to Haldimand, same date&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, X.,
450-1; Same to McKee, from Detroit, Feb. 1, 1781&mdash;De Peyster, <q>Miscellanies,</q>
p. xxvi.; Linctot to commanding officer at the Falls of Ohio,
<q>Opost Vincennes,</q> Jan. 13, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q> I., 432;
Draper on date of the expedition, <q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XXVI., 88;
De Peyster to Powell, from Detroit, Mar. 17, 1781&mdash;<q>Mich. Pioneer Coll.,</q>
XIX., 600; Sinclair to Powell, from Michilimackinac Id., May 1,
1781&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
XIX., 632; <q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 216.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the very midst of winter, on January 2, 1781, an
expedition commanded by Eugenio Pierre, a Spanish captain
of militia, set out from St. Louis against St. Josephs.
According to a Spanish account, the party consisted of
sixty-five militia men and sixty Indians, while an American
account declares it to have contained thirty Spaniards,
twenty men from Cahokia, and two hundred Indians.
</p>

<p>
The purpose of the expedition was to retaliate upon the
British for the attack on St. Louis and for the defeat of
La Balme. On the march, severe difficulties incident to
the season were encountered. The post was easily taken,
the Indians were conciliated by a liberal proportion of the
booty, the Spanish flag was raised and the Illinois country
with St. Josephs and its dependencies was claimed for the
crown of Spain. The British flag was given to Commandant
Cruzat, of St. Louis. These proceedings made some
prominent Americans fear that Spain would advance
claims to the region at the close of the Revolution.<note place='foot'>Jay
to Livingston, from Madrid, Apr. 28, 1782&mdash;<q>Secret Jour. of
Cong.,</q> IV., 64; or Wharton, <q>Dipl. Corr. of the Am. Rev.,</q> V., 363-4;
or Sparks, <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, VIII., 76-8; McCarty to Slaughter, from Ill.,
Jan. 27, 1781&mdash;<q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> III., 1-2; incomplete copy in
<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q> I., 465; Linctot to commanding officer at Falls of Ohio,
from Vincennes, Jan. 13, 1781&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q> I., 432; Franklin
to Livingston, from Passy, Apr. 12, 1782&mdash;Sparks, <q>Dipl. Corr. of the
Am. Rev.,</q> III., 339. See also <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, VIII., 150; Sparks,
<q>Franklin's Works,</q> IX., 206, Boston, 1856.</note>
</p>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
In the summer of 1781, a party of seven men was sent
out by the commandant at Michilimackinac with a letter
to the inhabitants of Cahokia and Kaskaskia asking them
to furnish troops to be paid by the king of England, and
to assume the defensive against the Spaniards. The men
reached St. Louis before visiting Cahokia or Kaskaskia,
and were arrested by the Spanish commandant, who sent
a copy of the letter to Major Williams, knowing no officer
in Illinois superior to him. This created jealousy at
Cahokia and Kaskaskia, each of several officers claiming
superiority. Charles Gratiot, a man of some ability, who
had removed from Cahokia to St. Louis because unable to
endure the lawlessness at the former place, wrote that he
did not know what course the Illinois people might have
taken if Cruzat had not intercepted the British agents.
Illinois was a country without a head where everyone
expected to do as he pleased.<note place='foot'>Linctot to
&mdash;&mdash;, from St. Louis, July 31, 1781&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark
MSS.,</q> LI., 75, original MS. in French; Gratiot to Clark, from St. Louis,
Aug. 1, 1781&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, LI., 77, original MS. in French.</note>
</p>

<p>
In noting the operations of the medley of military
forces in the County of Illinois, it is easy to conceive how
the result might have been different, but the fact is that as
the county ceased to exist, no nation had established a
better title to the region than that of the Americans.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Period of Anarchy in Illinois.<note place='foot'>This chapter was read, by request, before the Wisconsin Academy of Sciences,
Arts, and Letters, on February 8, 1906.</note></head>

<p>
Illinois was practically in a state of anarchy during
the time that it was a county of Virginia, and when
that county ceased to be, anarchy became technically as
well as practically its condition, and remained so until
government under the Ordinance of 1787 was inaugurated
in 1790.
</p>

<p>
Virginia's legacy from her ephemeral county was one
of unpaid bills. Scarcely had the general assembly
adjourned, in January, 1782, when Benjamin Harrison
wrote: <q>We know of no power given to any person to
draw bills on the State but to Col<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi>
Clarke and yet we find
them drawn to an immense amount by Col<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi> Montgomery,
and Captn Robt. George and some others; we have but
too much reason to suppose a collusion and fraud betwixt
the drawers and those they are made payable to; most of
them are for specie when they well knew we had none
amongst us, and from the largeness of the sums, proves
the transactions must have been in paper and the depreciation
taken into account, when the bargains were made;
indeed George confesses this to have been the case when
he gave Philip Barbour a bill for two hundred and thirty
two thousand, three hundred and twenty Dollars and uses
the plea of ignorance.</q> The transactions of Oliver
Pollock, purchasing agent at New Orleans, should be carefully
examined from the time he began to act with
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
Montgomery.<note place='foot'>In Council, Jan. 29, 1782&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> XLVI., 69,
original MS.</note> Thimothé Demunbrunt, as he signed his name,
asked pay for his services as lieutenant, in order that he
might not be a charge to his friends&mdash;a thing which
would be shameful to one of noble descent. He wished to
be able to support his family and to go with Clark on a
proposed expedition. His petition was supported by a
certificate from Col. Montgomery, testifying that Demunbrunt
had been active in his military duty, had gone
against the savages in the spring of 1780, had gone on the
<q>Expedition up the Wabash,</q> and had gone to the relief
of Fort Jefferson when Montgomery could raise only
twelve men.<note place='foot'>Demunbrunt to Clark, from Kaskaskia,
Mar. 5, 1782&mdash;<q>Draper Coll.,
Clark MSS.,</q> L., 70; LI., 25, original MS. Demunbrunt, whose name
also appears as Demunbrun and De Munbrun, was prominent in early Illinois
history. Records signed by him as Lieutenant Commandant <hi rend='italic'>par interim</hi>
appear in <q>John Todd's Record-Book</q> under the dates June 14, 1779, Feb'y,
1782, and March 22, 1782. In 1783, 1784, and probably at other dates he
made grants of land in the Illinois country. He served under Clark. From
the time Winston was appointed to the command of the County of Illinois,
until the coming of St. Clair, Demunbrunt was <q>commandant of the village of
Kaskaskia and its dependencies.</q> He had important dealings with an
embassy from the Cherokee Indians. He was allowed land under the Virginia
grants. In his memorial to the General Assembly, he said: <q>Your
memorialist, little acquainted with the mode of doing business in this State,
never kept a regular account, depending altogether on the justice and generosity
of the Legislature</q>&mdash;<q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> V., 15-18; <q>Chicago
Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 315-16; <q>Pub. Lands,</q> II., 146.</note>
</p>

<p>
The military troubles continued. The commander at
Vincennes reported his troops as destitute and unpaid.
Richard Winston, of Kaskaskia, who had succeeded Todd
as head of the civil government in Illinois, was arrested
by military force and put in jail. The prisoner claimed
that the proceedings were wholly irregular and that he
was unacquainted with the nature of the charge against
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
him.<note place='foot'>Todd to Winston, June 15, 1779, in <q>Chicago
Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV.,
302; Legras to Clark, from Vincennes, Dec. 31, 1782&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Clark
MSS.,</q> LII., 67, original MS.; <q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q>
IV., 289.</note> The next year, he was accused of treason, the
accuser declaring that Winston had proposed to turn Illinois
over to Spain, but that his proposal had been despised
by the Spanish commandant.<note place='foot'>Letter from
Capt. Dodge, from Kaskaskia, Mar. 6, 1783&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> LX., No. 3, p. 48.</note> Upon Winston was
also laid the chief blame for the discontent of the French,
he being charged with having told Montgomery that the
French were strangers to liberty and must be ruled with a
rod of iron or the bayonet, and that if he wanted anything
he must send his guards and take it by force; while, at
the same time, he told the French that the military was a
band of robbers and came to Illinois for plunder.<note place='foot'>Dodge to Clark, from
Kaskaskia, Mar. 3, 1783&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, LII., 78.</note> However,
numerous and well-founded as the accusations might
be, both accused and accuser laid their claims for salary
before the Virginia Board of Commissioners for the Settlement
of Western Accounts.<note place='foot'>Officers to Clark, from Ft. Nelson,
Falls of Ohio, March 30, 1783&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
LII., 80.</note> Even the notorious Col.
Montgomery presented before this board his defence,
which consisted of a recital of his meritorious deeds, others
being omitted.<note place='foot'>Montgomery to Board of
Commissioners, from New Holland, Feb. 22,
1783&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q> III., 441-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another visitor to the Board of Commissioners was
Francis Carbonneaux, prothonotary and notary public for
the Illinois country. Although he came to get some
private affairs settled, his chief mission was to lay before
the Board the confusion in Illinois, and the Board correctly
surmised that if Virginia did not afford relief the messenger
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
would proceed to Congress.<note place='foot'>Board
of Commissioners to Gov. Benjamin Harrison, from Jefferson
county, Feb. 17, 1783&mdash;<q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q>
IV., 350-1.</note> It was but natural that at
this time, the people of Illinois should be in doubt as to
whom to present their petition, because Virginia had
offered to cede her western lands to Congress, although
the terms of cession were not yet agreed upon. Carbonneaux
complained that Illinois was wholly without law
or government; that the magistrates, from indolence or
sinister views, had for some time been lax in the execution
of their duties, and were now altogether without
authority; that crimes of the greatest enormity might be
committed with impunity, and a man be murdered in his
own house and no one regard it; that there was neither
sheriff nor prison; and to crown the general confusion,
that many persons had made large purchases of three
and four hundred leagues, and were endeavoring to have
themselves established lords of the soil, as some had done
in Canada, and to have settlements made on these purchases,
composed of a set of men wholly subservient to
their views. The Spanish traded freely in Illinois, but
strictly prohibited Illinois from trading in Spanish dominions.
Complaint was also made that the Board of
Commissioners had not settled the Illinois accounts in
peltry according to the known rule and practice, namely:
that fifty pounds of peltry should represent one hundred
livres in money.
</p>

<p>
The petitioners prayed that a president of judicature
be sent to them, with executive powers to a certain
extent, and that subordinate civil officers be appointed, to
reside in each village or station, with power to hear and
decide all causes upon obligations not exceeding three
hundred dollars, higher amounts to be determined by a
court to be held at Kaskaskia and to be composed of the
president and a majority of the magistrates. It was
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
desired that the grant in which the Kaskaskia settlements
lay should be considered as one district. It contained five
villages, of which Kaskaskia and Cahokia were the
largest. The grant extended to the headwaters of the
Illinois River on the north. The land had been granted
to the settlers by the Indians, and the Indians, having
given their consent by solemn treaties, had never denied
the sale. The tract referred to was probably the two
purchases of the Illinois Company. Maps give but one of
these and, in fact, the other was said to be so described as
to comprise <emph>a line only</emph>. Naturally, this fact was not
known at the time of purchase.
</p>

<p>
It was frankly acknowledged that Illinois had no man
fitted for the office of president. It was hoped that Virginia
would furnish one, and would send with him a
company of regulars to act under his direction and enforce
laws and authority. The president should be empowered
to grant land in small tracts to immigrants. The
privilege of trading in Spanish waters, especially on the
Missouri, was much desired. It was said that Carbonneaux
<q>appears to have been instructed as to the ground of his
message by the better disposed part of the inhabitants of
the country whose complaints he represents.</q><note place='foot'>Walker
Daniel to Board of Commissioners, from New Holland, Feb.
3, 1783&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers,</q> III., 430-2.</note>
</p>

<p>
At the time of Carbonneaux's petition, there was no legal
way by which newcomers to Illinois could acquire public
land. Virginia had prepared to open a land-office, soon
after the conquest of the Illinois country, but she seems
to have heeded the recommendation of Congress that no
unappropriated land be sold during the war.<note place='foot'><q>Jour.
of Cong.,</q> III., 383-5.</note> Some grants
had been made by Todd, Demunbrunt, the Indians, and
others with less show of right, but they were made without
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
governmental authority. The Indians had presented a
tract of land to Clark, but the view consistently held was
that individuals could not receive Indian land merely upon
their own initiative.<note place='foot'><q>Jour. H. of Del.,</q>
Va., May Sess., 1780, 25, 69, 70.</note> One of the grants made at Vincennes,
which seems to have been a typical one, was
signed by Le Grand, <q>Colonel commandant and President
of the Court,</q> and was made by the authority granted to
the magistrates of the court of Vincennes by John Todd,
<q>Colonel and Grand civil Judge for the United States.</q>
The purpose of the grant, which comprised four hundred
arpents <q>in circumference,</q> was to induce immigration.<note place='foot'>Law,
<q>The Colonial Hist. of Vincennes,</q> 1858, 117-8, gives a copy of
the deed. For claims under such deeds see <q>Pub. Lands,</q> I., 294-8.</note>
The grants made by the court of Vincennes became
notorious from the fact that thousands of acres were granted
by the court to its own members.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q> I., 301.</note>
</p>

<p>
On March 1, 1784, Virginia ceded her western lands to
the United States, thus transferring to the general government
the question of land titles. The country had been
in a state of unconcealed anarchy for more than two
years, all semblance of Virginia authority having ceased,
and the cession is quite as much a tribute to Virginia's
shrewdness as to her generosity. Never was so large a
present made with less sacrifice. The cession was made
with the following conditions, some of which were to have
a direct and potent influence upon the settlement of the
ceded region:
</p>

<p>
1. The territory should be formed into states of not less
than one hundred nor more than one hundred and fifty
square miles each;
</p>

<p>
2. Virginia's expenses in subduing and governing the
territory should be reimbursed by the United States;
</p>

<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>

<p>
3. Settlers should have their <q>possessions and titles
confirmed;</q>
</p>

<p>
4. One hundred and fifty thousand acres, or less, should
be granted to George Rogers Clark and his soldiers;
</p>

<p>
5. The Virginia military bounty lands should be located
north of the Ohio River, unless there should prove to be
enough land for the purpose south of that river;
</p>

<p>
6. The proceeds from the sale of the lands should be
for the United States, severally.<note place='foot'><q>Jour.
of Cong.,</q> IV., 342-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year of the Virginia cession, Congress passed the
Ordinance for the Government of the Western Territory,
but as it never went into effect, its importance is slight
except as indicative of the trend of public feeling on the
subjects which it involved. Should Jefferson's plan,
proposed at this time, have been carried out, Illinois would
have been parts of the states of Polypotamia, Illinois,
Assenisipia, and Saratoga.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IV.,
379-80; Thwaites, <q>The Boundaries of Wisconsin,</q> in
<q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> XI., 452, gives a map of Jefferson's proposed states.</note>
</p>

<p>
Carbonneaux, the messenger from Illinois to Virginia,
carried his petition to Congress. Congress paid the messenger,
referred the petition to a committee, and upon the
report of the committee voted to choose one or more
commissioners to go to Illinois and investigate conditions
there.<note place='foot'><q>Jour. of Cong.,</q> IV.,
473, 477.</note> No record of the appointment of such commissioners
has been found. Congress considered Carbonneaux's
petition early in 1785. In November of the same
year comes a record of the anarchy in Illinois. This was
addressed to George Rogers Clark, who was the hope of
the people of that neglected country. The commandant
at St. Louis is afraid of an attack from the Royalists at
Michilimackinac, or he has given orders for all the people
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
in that place to be in readiness when called on, with their
arms.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Indians are very troublesome on the rivers, and
declare an open war with the Americans, which I am sure
is nothing lessened by the advice of our neighbors, the
French in this place, and the people from Michilimackinac,
who openly say they will oppose all the Americans that
come into this country. For my part, it is impossible to
live here, if we have not regular justice very soon. They
are worse than the Indians, and ought to be ruled with a
rod of iron.</q><note place='foot'>John Edgar
to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Nov. 7, 1785&mdash;<q>Draper's
Notes, Trip 1860,</q> VI., 214-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
During the year 1786, George Rogers Clark was the
chief factor in Illinois affairs. He was regarded by the
people as their advocate before Congress. In March,
seven of the leading men of Vincennes, at the request of
the French and American inhabitants, sent a petition to
him asking him to persuade Congress to send troops to
defend them from the Indians, and also saying: <q>We
have unanimously agreed to present a petition to Congress
for relief, apprehensive that the Deed we received from an
office, established or rather continued by Col<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>o</hi>
Todd for lands, may possibly be a slender foundation; so that after
we have passed through a scene of suffering in forming
settlements in a remote and dangerous part may have the
mortification to be totally deprived of our improvements.</q><note place='foot'>Petition
to Clark, from Vincennes, Mar. 16, 1786&mdash;<q>Draper Coll.,
Clark MSS.,</q> LIII., 23.</note>
In June, seventy-one American subscribers from Vincennes,
<q>in the County of Illinois,</q> asked Congress to
settle their land-titles and give them a government.
They held land from grants from an office established by
Col. Todd, whose validity they questioned. The commandant
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
and magistracy had resigned because of the
disobedience of the people. There was no executive, no
law, no government, and the Indians were very hostile.<note place='foot'>Petition
to Congress, from Vincennes, June 1, 1786&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
LIII., 31.</note>
</p>

<p>
Clark was not unmindful of the needs of the people.
He wrote to the president of Congress: <q>The inhabitants
of the different towns in the Illinois are worthy the
attention of Congress. They have it in their power to be
of infinite service to us, and might act as a great barrier to
the frontier, if under proper regulation; but having no
law or government among them, they are in great confusion,
and without the authority of Congress is extended
to them, they must, in all probability, fall a sacrifice to the
savages, who may take advantage of the disorder and
want of proper authority in that country. I have recommended
it to them, to re-assume their former customs,
and appoint temporary officers until the pleasure of
Congress is known, which I have flattered them would be
in a short time. How far the recommendation will answer
the desired purpose is not yet known.</q><note place='foot'>Clark
to Richard H. Lee, pres. of Cong., from Louisville, received
June 8, 1786&mdash;<q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> VI., 208-9.</note>
</p>

<p>
Clark's fears of the Indians were only too well grounded.
During the summer, the American settlers were compelled
to retire to a fort at Bellefontaine, and four of their number
were killed. At the same time, about twenty Americans
were killed about Vincennes. The French were still safe
from Indian attacks and were very angry because the
Americans complained of existing conditions.<note place='foot'>Moses Henry
to Clark, from Vincennes, June 12, 1786&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> LIII., 32.</note> The strife
between the French and the Americans at Vincennes, over
the proper relations of the whites to the Indians, became
intense. The French contended that the Indians should
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
be allowed to come and go freely, while the Americans
held that it was unsafe to grant such freedom. At last,
upon the occasion of the killing of an Indian by the
Americans, after they had been attacked by the Indians,
the French citizens ordered all persons, who had not permission
to settle from the government under which they
last resided, to leave at once and at their own risk. The
French told the Americans plainly that they were not
wanted, and that they, the French, did not know whether
the place belonged to the United States or to Great
Britain.<note place='foot'>Daniel Sullivan to Clark,
from Vincennes, June 23, 1786&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> LIII., 35; John Small
to Clark, same place and day&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
LIII., 36.</note> This last assertion was probably true. The
British Michilimackinac Company had a large trading-house
at Cahokia for supplying the Indians, they held
Detroit, and their machinations among the Indians were
constant. The feeling of all intelligent Americans in
Illinois must have been expressed by John Edgar when
he wrote that the Illinois country was totally lost unless a
government should soon be established.<note place='foot'>John Edgar to Clark, from
Kaskaskia, Oct. 23, 1786&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, LIII., 56.</note> Clark
wrote a vigorous letter to the people at Vincennes, telling them
that unless they stopped quarreling military rule would
be established; that the government established under
Virginia was still in force, having been confirmed by
Congress upon the acceptance of the Virginia deed of
cession, and that the court, if depleted, should be filled by
election.<note place='foot'>Clark to people of
Vincennes&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, LIII., 52.</note>
</p>

<p>
In one respect, even during this trying period, the
western country gave promise of its future growth.
There was a large crop. Flour and pork, quoted,
strangely enough, together, sold at the Falls of Ohio at
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
twelve shillings per hundred pounds, while Indian corn
sold at nine pence per bushel.<note place='foot'>Letter
from a man at Falls of Ohio to a friend in N. England, Dec. 4,
1786&mdash;<q>Secret Jour. of Cong.,</q> IV., 321.</note>
</p>

<p>
On August 24, 1786, Congress ordered its secretary to
inform the inhabitants of Kaskaskia that a government was
being prepared for them.<note place='foot'><q>Jour. of
Cong.,</q> IV., 688-9.</note> In 1787, conditions in the Illinois
country became too serious to be ignored. The Indian
troubles were grave and persistent, but graver still was
the danger of the rebellion or secession of the Western
Country or else of a war with Spain. The closure of the
Mississippi by Spain made the West desperate. Discontent,
anarchy, and petitions might drag a weary length,
but when troops raised without authority were quartered
at Vincennes, when these troops seized Spanish goods, and
impressed the property of the inhabitants of Vincennes,
and proposed to treat with the Indians, the time for action
was at hand. In April, Gen. Josiah Harmar, then at Falls
of Ohio, was ordered to move the greater part of his
troops to Vincennes to restore order among the distracted
people at that place. Intruders upon the public lands
were to be removed, and the lawless and illegally levied
troops were to be dispersed.<note place='foot'>Harmar to Sec'y
of War, from Fort Harmar, May 14, 1787&mdash;<q>St.
Clair Papers,</q> II., 20-1; Maj. Wyllys to Harmar, from Fort Finney, Rapids
of Ohio, Feb. 6, 1787&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> I., 281-2; Knox to
Harmar, June 19, 1787&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I., 303. See
also <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I., 290; Sec'y of
War to Harmar, Apr. 26, 1787&mdash;<q>St. Clair Papers,</q> II., 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
Arrived at Vincennes, Gen. Harmar proceeded with
vigor. The resolution of Congress against intruders on
the public lands was published in English and in French.
The inhabitants, especially the Americans whose hold on
their lands was the more insecure, were dismayed, and
French and Americans each prepared a petition to Congress,
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
and appointed Bartholomew Tardiveau, who was
to go to Congress within a month, as their agent.
Tardiveau was especially fitted for this task by his intimate
acquaintance with the land grants of the region.
Each party at Vincennes also prepared an address to Gen.
Harmar, the Americans declaring that they were settled
on French lands and feared that their lands would be
taken from them without payment and asking aid from
Congress, and the French expressing their joy at being
freed from their former bad government. Many of Clark's
militia had made tomahawk-rights, and this added to the
confusion of titles.<note place='foot'>Harmar to
Sec'y of War, from Vincennes, Aug. 7, 1787&mdash;<q>St. Clair
Papers,</q> II., 27-9; Address of Am. settlers at Vincennes to Harmar, transmitted
to the War Office, Aug. 7, 1787&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q>
I., 337-9; Address of French at Vincennes to Harmar, July 28,
1787&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I., 331-3.</note>
</p>

<p>
From August 9 to 16, Gen. Harmar, with an officer and
thirty men, some Indian hunters, and Tardiveau, journeyed
overland from Vincennes to Kaskaskia, where conditions
were to be investigated. The August sun poured down
its rays upon the parched prairies and dwindling streams.
Water was bad and scarce, but buffalo, deer, bear, and
smaller game were abundant.
</p>

<p>
Harmar found life in the settlements he visited as crude
as the path he traveled. Kaskaskia was a French village of
one hundred and ninety-one men, old and young, with an
accompaniment of women and children of various mixtures
of white and red blood. Cahokia, then the metropolis, had
two hundred and thirty-nine Frenchmen, old and young,
with an accompaniment similarly mixed. Between these
settlements was Bellefontaine, a small stockade, inhabited
altogether by Americans, who had settled without authority.
The situation was a beautiful one; the land was fertile; there
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
was no taxation, and the people had an abundance to live
upon. They were much alarmed when told of their precarious
state respecting a title to their lands, and they gave
Tardiveau a petition to carry to Congress. On the route
to Cahokia, another stockade, Grand Ruisseau, similarly
inhabited by Americans, was passed. There were about
thirty other American intruders in the fertile valleys near
the Mississippi, and they, too, gave Tardiveau a petition to
Congress.
</p>

<p>
The Kaskaskia, Peoria, Cahokia, and Mitcha tribes of
Indians numbered only about forty or fifty members, of
whom but ten or eleven individuals composed the Kaskaskia
tribe; but this does not mean that danger from
the Indians was not great, because other and more hostile
tribes came in great numbers to hunt in the Illinois country.
The significance of the diminished numbers of these
particular tribes lies in the fact that they had the strongest
claim to that part of Illinois which would be first needed
for settlement. At Kaskaskia and Cahokia, the French
were advised to obey their magistrates until Congress had
a government ready for them, and Cahokia was advised to
put its militia into better shape, and to put any turbulent
or refractory persons under guard until a government could
be instituted.<note place='foot'>Harmar to Sec'y of
War, from Fort Harmar, Nov. 24, 1787&mdash;<q>St.
Clair Papers,</q> II., 30-2.</note>
</p>

<p>
Having finished his work in the settlements near the
Mississippi, Harmar returned to Vincennes, where he held
councils with the Indians, and on October 1, set out on his
return to Fort Harmar. Although without authority to
give permanent redress, he had persuaded the French at
Vincennes to relinquish their charter and to throw themselves
upon the generosity of Congress. <q>As it would
have been impolitic, after the parade we had made, to
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
entirely abandon the country,</q> he left Maj. John F. Hamtramck,
with ninety-five men, at Vincennes.<note place='foot'>Harmar
to the Sec'y of War, from Fort Harmar, Nov. 24, 1787&mdash;<q>St.
Clair Papers,</q> II., 34.</note> Harmar's
visit was doubtless of some value, but he had not been
gone five weeks when Hamtramck wrote to him: <q>Our
civil administration has been, and is, in a great confusion.
Many people are displeased with the Magistrates; how it will go at
the election, which is to be the 2d of Dec<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi>, I
know not. But it is to be hoped that Congress will soon
establish some mode of government, for I never saw so
injudicious administration. Application has repeatedly
been made to me for redress. I have avoided to give
answer, not knowing how far my powers extended. In
my opinion, the Minister of War should have that matter
determined, and sincerely beg you would push it. I confess
to you, that I have been very much at a loss how to
act on many occasions.</q><note place='foot'>Hamtramck to Harmar, from
Vincennes, Nov. 3, 1787&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> I., 352.</note>
</p>

<p>
Not earlier than the 24th of November, Tardiveau set out
for Congress with his petitions from the Illinois country.
Harmar was much pleased to have so able a messenger,
and spoke of him as sensible, well-informed, and able to
give a minute and particular description of the western
country, particularly the Illinois. He had been preceded
to Congress by Joseph Parker, of Kaskaskia. Harmar
seems to have regarded Tardiveau as a sort of antidote to
Parker, for he closes his recommendation of the former by
saying: <q>There have been some imposters before Congress,
particularly one Parker, a whining, canting Methodist,
a kind of <emph>would-be governor</emph>. He is extremely
unpopular at Kaskaskia, and despised by the inhabitants.</q><note place='foot'>Harmar
to Sec'y of War, from Fort Harmar, Nov. 24, 1787&mdash;<q>St.
Clair Papers,</q> II., 35.</note>
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
This detracts from the value of Parker's representations,
which had been made in a letter to St. Clair, the President
of Congress. After explaining that when he left Kaskaskia,
on June 5, 1787, the people did not have an
intended petition ready, Parker complained of the lack of
government in Illinois, the presence of British traders, the
depopulation of the country by the inducements of the
Spaniards, and the high rate at which it was proposed to
sell lands. His complaints were true, although he may
have failed to give them in their proper
proportion.<note place='foot'><q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> VI., 170-3.</note>
</p>

<p>
On July 13, 1787, the Ordinance of 1787 had been
passed by Congress. The Illinois country was at that
time ready for war against the Spanish, who persisted in
closing the Mississippi. The troops, irregularly levied by
George Rogers Clark at Vincennes, had seized some
Spanish goods on the theory that if the Spanish would
not allow the United States to navigate the lower Mississippi,
the Spanish should not be allowed to navigate the
upper Mississippi. John Rice Jones, later the first lawyer
in Illinois, was Clark's commissary.<note place='foot'><q>Secret
Jour. of Cong.,</q> IV., 301-29.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Ordinance of 1787 was the only oil then at hand
for these troubled waters. The situation in Illinois was a
complicated one, and probably the numerical weakness of
the population alone saved the country from disastrous
results. The few Americans in Illinois desired governmental
protection from the Spanish, the Indians, the
British, and any Americans who might seek to jump the
claims of the first squatters; the few French desired
protection from the Spanish, the Americans, the British,
and soon from the Indians; the numerous Indians, permanent
or transient, desired protection from the Spanish, the
Americans, and in rare cases from an Americanized
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
Frenchman. Americans, French, Spanish, British, and
Indians made an opportunity for many combinations.
</p>

<p>
For the French inhabitants, the somewhat paternal
character of the government provided for by the Ordinance
was a matter of no concern. The great rock of offense
for them was the prohibition of slavery. An exodus to
the Spanish side of the Mississippi resulted and St. Louis
profited by what the older villages of Illinois lost.<note place='foot'>St.
Clair to the President, 1790&mdash;<q>St. Clair Papers</q> II., 175.</note> In
addition to a justifiable feeling of uncertainty as to
whether they would be allowed to retain their slaves, the
credulous French had their fears wrought upon by persons
interested in the sale of Spanish lands. These persons
took pains to inculcate the belief that all slaves would be
released upon American occupancy. The Spanish officials
were also active. The commandant at St. Louis wrote to
the French at Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennes, respectively,
inviting them to settle west of the Mississippi and
offering free lands.<note place='foot'>Hamtramck to Harmar, from
Vincennes, Oct. 13, 1788&mdash;<q>Draper Coll.,
Harmar Papers,</q> I., 479; extract in <q>St. Clair
Papers,</q> II., 105.</note> Mr. Tardiveau, the agent for the
Illinois settlers to Congress, tried to induce Congress to
repeal the anti-slavery clause of the Ordinance. He said
that it threatened to be the ruin of Illinois. Designing
persons had told the French that the moment Gen. St.
Clair arrived all their slaves would be free. Failing in his
efforts to secure a repeal, he wrote to Gen. St. Clair, asking
him to secure from Congress a resolution giving the true
intent of the act.<note place='foot'>Tardiveau to St.
Clair, from Danville, June 30, 1789&mdash;<q>St. Clair
Papers,</q> II., 117-19.</note> In this letter, Tardiveau advanced the
doctrine, later so much used, that the evils of slavery
would be mitigated by its diffusion.<note place='foot'>Extract from above
letter.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 119-20, note.</note> The first panic of
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
the French only gradually subsided and the question of
slavery was a persistent one.
</p>

<p>
One of the most industrious of those interested in the
sale of Spanish lands was George Morgan, of New
Jersey.<note place='foot'>George Morgan was much engaged in large land purchases. In 1763,
some Shawanese and other Indians carried off the property of certain whites
to the value of £85,916 10<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi>, 8<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi>
The offenders being tributary to the Six
Nations, the latter granted to King George III., for the exclusive use of the
sufferers, on November 3, 1768, at Fort Stanwix, the tract of some two million
five hundred thousand acres, later known as the claim of the Indiana
Company. The land lay southeast of the Ohio, and was claimed in part by
both Virginia and Pennsylvania. For map see <q>States of America,</q> by J.
Russell, London, E. Dilly and G. G. and J. Robinson, 1799; Hutchins, <q>Topographical
Desc. of Va.,</q> etc., French ed., Paris, 1781; Winsor, <q>Westward
Movement,</q> 17. Morgan, who was a large shareholder in the company, was
for years its agent. The claim was finally denied. Morgan was also the
founder of New Madrid, in what is now Missouri, but he was unfortunate in
assuming powers denied by the Spanish government. His experience in
Illinois was likewise a failure&mdash;<q>Cal. of Va. State Papers</q> I., 273, 297, 320;
VI., 1-36 (a history of the Indiana purchase), 261, 679, 301; <q>Jour. of
Cong.,</q> III., 359, 373; IV., 23; <q>Rept. on Canadian Archives,</q> 1888, p.
939; <q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q> LIII., 78; Gayerré, <q>Hist. of La.,</q>
index under Morgan refers to passages giving several quotations from sources;
Kate Mason Rowland, <q>George Mason,</q> I., 230, 324-8, 289, 308, 333,
341-4; II., 21, 26, 239, 244, 262, 341-5, 406, 440-1. George Mason was
manager for the commonwealth when, in 1791, the final effort was made by
the Indiana Company to overthrow the Virginia settlement of its claim.
Some original sources of importance are given in this work&mdash;<q>Plain Facts:
being an Examination into the Rights of the Indian Nations of America, to
their respective Countries, and a Vindication of the Grant, from the Six
United Nations of Indians, to the Proprietors of Indiana, against the decision
of Virginia, together with authentic documents, proving that the territory,
westward of the Alleghany Mountain, never belonged to Virginia, etc., Philadelphia...:
M.DCC.LXXXI.</q> The work gives a resumé of the
proceedings of the company to 1779, 164 pp. <q>View of the Title to Indiana,
a tract of country on the River Ohio,</q> 24 pp., printed about 1775.</note>
In 1788, he tried to secure land in Illinois also.
He and his associates petitioned Congress to sell them a
tract of land on the Mississippi. A congressional committee
found upon investigation that the proposed purchase
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
comprised all of the French settlements in
Illinois.<note place='foot'><q>Jour. of Cong.,</q> IV., 341-2, 823-5.</note>
Thereupon was passed the Act of June 20, 1788. According
to its provisions, the French inhabitants of Illinois
were to be confirmed in their possessions and each family
which was living in the district before the year 1783 was
to be given a bounty of four hundred acres. These bounty-lands
were to be laid off in three parallelograms, at Kaskaskia,
Prairie du Rocher, and Cahokia, respectively.
They were to be bounded on the east by the ridge of
rocks&mdash;a natural formation trending from north to south,
a short distance to the east of the French settlements.
Morgan was to be sold a large described tract for not less
than sixty-six and two-thirds cents per acre. Indian
titles were to be extinguished if necessary.<note place='foot'><q>Jour.
of Cong.,</q> IV., 823-5. The location of the ridge of rocks is
clearly shown in Hutchins' <q>Topographical Desc. of Va.,</q> 1778, on a map
opposite p. 41. French edition of 1781, facing p. 16; Winsor, <q>Nar. and
Crit. Hist. of Am.,</q> VI., 700; Collot, <q>Atlas of America,</q> 1826.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Act of June 20, 1788, is an important landmark in
the settlement of Illinois. The grant of bounty-lands
was made for the purpose of giving the French settlers a
means of support when the fur-trade and hunting should
have become unprofitable from the advance of American
settlement. This was a clear acknowledgment that the
Indians were right in believing, as they did, that the
American settlement would be fatal to Indian hunting-grounds.
The Indians were soon bitterly hostile. Then,
too, the claims of the settlers to land, founded upon
French, British, or Virginia grants, were to be investigated.
This investigation dragged on year after year, even for
decades, and as it was the policy of the United States
not to sell public land in Illinois until these claims were
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
settled, the country became a great squatters'<note place='foot'>Throughout
the period covered by this work, the term squatter denoted
one who illegally settled on public land, without a title. Later laws permitted
settling before securing a title, but in the early period, no squatting
was legal.</note> camp.
The length of the investigation was doubtless due in part
to the utter carelessness of the French in giving and in
keeping their evidences of title.
</p>

<p>
By a congressional resolution of August 28, 1788, it was
provided that the lands donated to Illinois settlers should
be located east, instead of west, of the ridge of rocks. As
this would throw the land too far from the settlements to
be available, petitions followed for the restoration of the
provisions of June 20, and in 1791 the original location
was decreed. By a resolution of August 29, 1788, the
governor of the Northwest Territory was ordered to carry
out the provisions of the acts of June 20 and August 28,
1788, respectively.<note place='foot'><q>Jour. of Cong.,</q> IV., 857-9.</note>
</p>

<p>
The beginning of operations, in accordance with the acts
just cited, was delayed by the fact that the governor and
judges, appointed under the Ordinance of 1787, and who
alone could institute government under it, did not reach
the Illinois country until 1790. In the meantime, anarchy
continued. Contemporary accounts give a good idea of the
attempts at government during the time, and the fact of
their great interest, combined with the fact that most of
them are yet unpublished, seems to warrant treatment of
the subject at some length.
</p>

<p>
The court at Kaskaskia met more than a score of times
during 1787 and 1788. Its record consists in large part of
mere meetings and adjournments. All members of the
court were French, while litigants and the single jury
recorded were Americans. Jurors from Bellefontaine
received forty-five livres each, and those from Prairie du
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
Rocher, twenty-five livres each. This court seems to have
been utterly worthless.<note place='foot'><q>John Todd's
Record-Book,</q> <q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV.,
308-14.</note> At Vincennes, matters were at
least as bad. <q>It was the most unjust court that could
have been invented. If anybody called for a court, the
president had 20 livers in peltry; 14 magistrates, each 10
livers; for a room, 10 livers; other small expenses, 10
livers; total in peltry, 180 livers&mdash;which is 360 in money. So
that a man who had twenty or thirty dollars due, was obliged
to pay, if he wanted a court, 180 livers in peltry: This
court also never granted an execution, but only took care
to have the fees of the court paid. The government of
this country has been in the Le Gras and Gamelin family
for a long time, to the great dissatisfaction of the people,
who presented me a Petition some days ago, wherein they
complained of the injustice of their court&mdash;in consequence
of which, I have dissolved the old court, ordered new
magistrates to be elected, and established new regulations
for them to go by.</q><note place='foot'><p>Hamtramck to Harmar,
from Vincennes, April 13, 1788&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> I., 386-7. At the time fees as above were being
charged, prices current in Vincennes were:
</p>
<p>
Corn, per bu. $ 2.00<lb/>
Flour, per cwt. 7.00<lb/>
Pork, per lb. .30<lb/>
Beef, per lb. .15<lb/>
Bordeaux wine, per bottle 2.00<lb/>
Spirits, per gal. 12.00<lb/>
Whisky, per gal. $ 8.00<lb/>
Butter, per lb. 1.00<lb/>
Eggs, per doz. 1.00<lb/>
Loaf sugar, per lb. 1.00<lb/>
Brown sugar, per lb. .60<lb/>
Coffee, per lb. 1.45<lb/>
A dunghill fowl $ 1.00<lb/>
Potatoes, per bu. 2.00<lb/>
Onions, per bu. 5.00<lb/>
Cabbage, per head .15<lb/>
Turnips, per bu. 1.00
</p>
<p>
See <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 388-9.
</p>
<p>
Beef was probably buffalo beef, as that was then the common meat for
garrisons and settlers in the West.</p></note> Upon the dissolution of the court,
Maj. Hamtramck issued the following:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>REGULATIONS FOR THE COURT OF POST VINCENNES.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In consequence of a Petition presented to me by the
people of Post Vincennes, wherein they complain of the
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
great expence to which each individual is exposed in the
recovery of his property by the present court, and as they
express a wish to have another mode established for the
administration of justice&mdash;I do, therefore, by these presents,
dissolve the said court, and direct that five magistrates
be elected by the suffrages of the people who, when chosen,
will meet and settle their seniority.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>One magistrate will have power to try causes, not
exceeding fifty livers in peltry. Two magistrates will
determine all causes not exceeding one hundred livers in
peltry,&mdash;from their decision any person aggrieved may
(on paying the cost of the suit) appeal to the District
Court, which will consist of three magistrates; the senior
one will preside. They will meet the third Tuesday in every
month and set two days, unless the business before them
be completed within that time. All causes in this court
shall be determined by a jury of twelve inhabitants. Any
person summoned by the sheriff as a juryman who refuses
or neglects to attend, shall be fined the price of a day's
labour. In case of indisposition, he will, previous to the
sitting of the court, inform the clerk, Mr. Antoine Gamelin,
who will order such vacancies to be filled.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The fees of the court shall be as follows: A magistrate,
for every cause of fifty livers or upwards in peltry, shall
receive one pistole in peltry, and in proportion for a lesser
sum. The sheriff for serving a writ or a warrant shall
receive three livers in peltry; for levying an execution, 5
per cent, including the fees of the clerk of the court.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The clerk for issuing a writ shall receive three livers in
peltry, and all other fees as heretofore. The jury being
an office which will be reciprocal, are not to receive pay.
All expenses of the court are to be paid by the person that
is cast. This last part may appear to you to be an extraordinary
charge&mdash;but my reason for mentioning it is, that
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
formerly the court made the one who was most able pay
the fees of the court, whether he lost or no.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The magistrates, before they enter into the execution
of their office, will take the following oath before the commandant:
I, A., do swear that I will administer justice
impartially, and to the best of my knowledge and understanding,
so help me God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Given under my hand this 5th day of April, 1788.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l>(Signed) <hi rend='smallcaps'>J. F. Hamtramck</hi>,</l>
<l>Maj<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>r</hi>.
Comd'g.<note place='foot'><q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> I., 389-92.</note></l>
</lg>

<p>
A little later, Hamtramck wrote: <q>Our new government
has taken place; five magistrates have been elected by the
suffrage of the people, but not one of the Ottoman families
remains in. One Mr. Miliet, Mr. Henry, Mr. Bagargon,
Capt. Johnson, and Capt. Dalton, have been elected. You
will be surprised to see Dalton in office; but I found that
he had too many friends to refuse him. I keep a watch-side
eye over him, and find that he conducts himself with
great propriety.</q><note place='foot'>Hamtramck to
Harmar, from Vincennes, May 21, 1788&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> I., 396. <q>Mr. Henry, of this place, who is very
much connected with the Indians, particularly his wife,</q> implies that Henry's
wife was an Indian&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 3-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
The relief afforded by the new court was not complete,
for soon came the report: <q>The people are very impatient
to see Gen. St. Clair or some of the judges; in fact, they
are very much wanted.</q><note place='foot'>Same to same, Aug. 31,
1788&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I., 450.</note> The term of the members of
the court expired in April, 1789, and no new members
were elected, because the early arrival of Gen. St. Clair
was expected.<note place='foot'>Same to same, July 29,
1789&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 70-1.</note> An interregnum occurred, and
in November, 1789, Hamtramck wrote to Harmar: <q rend='pre'>It is high time
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
that government should take place in this country, and if
it should happen that the Governor was not to come, nor
any of the Judges, I would beg (for the sake of the people)
that his Excellency would give me certain powers to create
magistrates, a Sheriff and other officers, for the purpose of
establishing Courts of Justice&mdash;for, at present, there are
none, owing to the daily expectation of the arrival of the
Governor. Those that had been appointed by the people
last year, their authority has been refused in the courts of
Kentucky, they declaring that by the resolve of Congress,
neither the people of Post Vincennes, or the commanding
officer, had a right to appoint magistrates; that the power
was vested in the Governor only, and that it was an usurped
authority. You see, Sir, how much to the prejudice of the
people their present situation is, and how necessary it is
that some steps should be taken to relieve them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The powers of the magistrates may be circumscribed
as his Excellency may think proper, but the necessity of
having such characters will appear when I assure you that
at present no person here, can administer an oath which
will be considered legal in the courts of Kentucky&mdash;and
for the reasons above mentioned.</q><note place='foot'>Hamtramck
to Harmar, from Vincennes, Nov. 11, 1789&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 130-2.</note>
</p>

<p>
At last, on June 19, 1790, the judges for the Northwest
Territory arrived at Vincennes.<note place='foot'>Same to same, June
24, 1790&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 254.</note>
</p>

<p>
The situation at Kaskaskia was even worse than that at
Vincennes, because Vincennes had a garrison. To understand
the complaints of the time, it is necessary to notice
the relations with Spain. On the first day of 1788,
Hamtramck wrote: <q>The Spanish commanding officers of
the different posts on the Mississippi are encouraging
settlers by giving them lands gratis. A village by the
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
name of Zewapetas, which is about thirty miles above the
mouth of the Ohio, and which was begun last summer,
consists now of thirty or fifty families.</q><note place='foot'>Same to &mdash;&mdash;,
Jan. 1, 1788&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I., 371.</note> In the following
October, Morgan made flattering offers to persons who
would settle at New Madrid.<note place='foot'>Morgan's proclamation,
Oct. 3, 1788&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, <q>Clark MSS.,</q> LIII., 78,
incomplete.</note> At the same time, the
Mississippi was closed to Americans. Joseph St. Marie, of
Vincennes, sent his clerk with a load of peltry to be traded
to the Indians on the banks of the Mississippi. His goods
were seized and confiscated by the Spanish commander at
the Arkansas Post. The commander said that his orders
were to seize all goods of Americans, found in the Mississippi
below the mouth of the Ohio. Upon appeal to Gov.
Miro, of Louisiana, the governor said that the court of
Spain had given orders to send offending traders prisoners
to the mines of Brazil.<note place='foot'>From Vincennes, Aug. 26,
1788&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> I.,
455-61.</note>
</p>

<p>
The combination of inducements to such as would
become Spanish subjects and of severity to such as would
not do so, secured Spain some settlers. Hamtramck
said: <q>I am fearful that the Governor will not find many
people in the Illinois, as they are daily going on the
Spanish side. I believe that all our Americans of Post
Vincennes will go to Morgan&mdash;a number of them are
already gone to see him. I am told that Mr. Morgan has
taken unwarrantable measures to invite the people of
Illinois to come to him, saying that the Governor never
would come in that country, and that their negroes were
all free the moment the government should be established&mdash;for
which all the remaining good inhabitants propose to
go to him. I can not give you this for certain; I will
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
know better in a short time, and inform you.</q><note place='foot'>Hamtramck to
Harmar, from Vincennes, Mar. 28, 1789&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II.,
17-18.</note> <q>I have
the honor to enclose you Mr. Morgan's letter <emph>at his request</emph>,
and one for you. You will see in Mr. Morgan's that a
post will be established opposite the Ohio; and if what
Mr. Morgan says is true (which I doubt not), respecting
the inhabitants of the Illinois, the Governor will have no
occasion to go there. Will you be so good as to inform
me if Congress have changed their resolution respecting
the freedom of the negroes of this country; and if they
are free from the day of the resolve, or if from the day it is
published in a district.</q><note place='foot'>Hamtramck to Harmar, from
Vincennes, Apr. 11, 1789&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 27-28.</note> A few weeks later, Harmar wrote
to St. Clair: <q>The emigration continues, it possible, more
rapid than ever; within these twenty days, not less than
one hundred souls have passed [Fort Harmar, at Falls of
Ohio] daily: the people are all taken up with Col.
Morgan's New Madrid.... The generality of the
inhabitants of Kaskaskias, and a number of those at Post
Vincennes, I am informed, have quit those villages, and gone
over to the Spanish side. The arrival of your Excellency
amongst them, I believe is anxiously expected.</q><note place='foot'>Harmar to St.
Clair, from Fort Harmar, May 8, 1789&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 51.
Harmar to Knox, same date and of similar tenor&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
II., 53.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Indians were very hostile, and it is noteworthy that
by the middle of 1789, the comparative immunity of the
French from attack had ceased. Only negroes were safe,
and they, probably, because they sold well.<note place='foot'>Hamtramck to Wyllys, from
Vincennes, May 27, 1789&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 39.</note> Civil
government was at low ebb in the Kaskaskia region. By
January, 1789, the court at Kaskaskia had dissolved.<note place='foot'>Hamtramck to
Harmar, from Fort Knox, Vincennes, Jan. 19, 1789&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
II., 1.</note>
</p>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
The depopulation of Illinois led Hamtramck to write to
Bartholomew Tardiveau, at the Falls of Ohio, asking
whether it were true that the slaves of the French were to
be free. Tardiveau responded that it was not true, and
that he had written from New York, the preceding
December, to Hamtramck and to Illinois concerning the
matter, but that his letters had been intercepted. The
true meaning of the resolve of Congress was published at
Vincennes upon the receipt of Tardiveau's letter and was
to be published in Illinois at the first opportunity. The
narration of these facts was closed by the statement that
if the governor or the judges did not come soon, most of
the people would go to the Spanish side, <q>for they begin to
think there are no such men as a Governor or Judges.</q><note place='foot'>Hamtramck to
Harmar, from Vincennes, Aug. 14, 1798&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 90-1.</note>
</p>

<p>
In September, 1789, Hamtramck received the following
petition from Kaskaskia:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To John Francis Hamtramck, Esqr., Major of the 1st
U. S. Reg<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>t.</hi> and commandant at
Post Vincennes, &amp;c. &amp;c.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The inhabitants of Kaskaskias, in the Illinois, beg
leave to address you, as the next commanding officer in
the service of the United States, to lay before you the
deplorable situation we are reduced to, and the absolute
necessity of our being speedily succoured to prevent as
well our total ruin, as that of the place.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Indians are greatly more numerous than the white
people, and are rather hostilely inclined; the name of an
American among them is a disgrace, because we have no
superior. Our horses, horned cattle, and corn are stolen
and destroyed without the power of making any effectual
resistance. Our houses are in ruin and decay; our lands
are uncultivated; debtors absconded and absconding; our
little commerce destroyed. We are apprehensive of a
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
dearth of corn, and our best prospects are misery and
distress, or what is more than probable an untimely death
by the hands of Savages.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We are well convinced that all these misfortunes have
befallen us for want of some superior, or commanding
authority; for ever since the cession of this Territory to
Congress, we have been neglected as an abandoned people,
to encounter all the difficulties that are always attendant
upon anarchy and confusion; neither did we know from
authority until latterly, to what power we were subject.
The greater part of our citizens have left the country on
this account to reside in the Spanish dominions; others
are now following, and we are fearful, nay, certain, that
without your assistance, the small remainder will be
obliged to follow their example.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thus situated, our last resource is to you, Sir, hoping
and praying that you will so far use your authority to save
an almost deserted country from destruction, and to order
or procure the small number of twenty men with an
officer, to be stationed among us for our defence; and that
you will make order for the establishment of a civil court
to take place immediately and to continue in force until
the pleasure of his Excellency the Governor shall be
known, and to whom we beg you would communicate our
distress.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We beg your answer by the return of the bearer,
addressed to the Rev<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>d</hi> Mr. Le Dru, our Priest, who
signs this in the name and at the request, of the inhabitants.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Dated at Kaskaskia the fourteenth day of September,
1789.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ledru, curé Des Kaskaskias pour tous les habitans
Français de l'endroit et outres voisins de la partie Americaine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Jno Edgar.</hi></q><note place='foot'>Inclosed
in Hamtramck to Harmar, from Vincennes, Nov. 2, 1789&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 124-7.</note>
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
John Edgar offered to furnish provisions for the twenty
soldiers asked for in the petition, and to take bills on
Congress in payment.<note place='foot'>Offer dated Oct. 3,
1789. Inclosed in Hamtramck to Harmar, Nov.
2, 1789&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 127-8.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hamtramck responded to the petition by saying that
sickness prevailed among the troops at Vincennes to such
an extent that twenty men could not be sent thence to
Kaskaskia, but that the request would be sent to headquarters.
As to the civil department, the people were
advised to elect two or three magistrates in every village.
These should prevent debtors from leaving, and should
levy on the goods of such debtors as had already gone to
the Spanish side. <q>Let your magistrates be respectable
men by their moral character, as well as in point of property;
let them attend with vigilance to all disputes that
may arise amongst you, and in a particular manner to the
Indian affairs.</q><note place='foot'>Hamtramck's reply of
Oct. 14, 1789, to petition of Sept. 14, preceding,
inclosed as above&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 128-30;
<q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q>
II., 128-130.</note> This reply reached Edgar on the night
of October 27, 1789. The next day, Edgar wrote to
Hamtramck saying that it was probable that the recommendations
in regard to establishing a civil government
could not be carried out without a military force. The
French were easily governed by a superior, but they knew
nothing of government by an equal. Indians were constantly
incited by the Spanish. They stole horses and
escaped to the Spanish side. Edgar enclosed correspondence
and depositions showing that on the night of the
eighth of October, John Dodge and Michael Antanya,
with a party of whites and Indians, came from the Spanish
side to Kaskaskia, made an unsuccessful attempt to carry
off some of Edgar's slaves, and threatened to burn the
village. He adds <q>[In] the spring it is impossible I can
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
stand my ground, surrounded as we are by savage enemies.
I have waited five years in hopes of a government; I shall
still wait until March, as I may be able to withstand them
in the winter season, but if no succour nor government
should then arrive, I shall be compelled to abandon the
country, and I shall go to live at St. Louis. Inclination,
interest and love for the country prompt me to reside here,
but when in so doing it is ten to one but both my life and
property will fall a sacrifice, you nor any impartial mind
can blame me for the part I shall take.</q><note place='foot'>Edgar to
Hamtramck, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 28, 1789&mdash;<q>Draper Coll.,
Harmar Papers,</q> II., 132-6.</note>
</p>

<p>
One day later, John Rice Jones wrote from Kaskaskia.
The answer to the petition sent by Ducoigne and addressed
to Ledru and Edgar, had been opened by the latter in the
absence and by the consent of the former. Ledru had
gone to be priest at St. Louis. At first he had refused the
offer of the position, but when he received his tithes at
Kaskaskia, he found that they would not support him, so
he was compelled to move. He met no better treatment
than de la Valiniere and Gibault before him, and no priest
was likely to fare any better until a government was
established. St. Pierre, priest at Cahokia, had gone to be
priest at Ste. Genevieve, and it was said that Gibault was
to be priest at L'Anse a la Graisse (New Madrid).
Morgan had been coolly received at New Orleans, and his
boasted settlement at New Madrid was almost broken up.
The attempted seizure of Edgar's negroes could not be
punished, because there was no one with authority to
remonstrate with the Spanish, and private remonstrances
were unheeded. The Spanish were making every effort to
depopulate Illinois. They well knew that the people
would follow their priests. Flattering offers had been
made to Edgar by the Spanish, among them being free
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
lands, no taxes, and free permission to work at the lead
mines and salt springs. He had refused all offers, but if
government was not established by the next March he
would go to St. Louis, and if he went, Kaskaskia would
be practically at an end. Twenty-four British trading-boats
from Michilimackinac were on the Mississippi on
the American side opposite the mouth of the Missouri.
Their purpose was to attract Indian trade.<note place='foot'>Jones to Hamtramck,
from Kaskaskia, Oct. 29, 1789&mdash;<q>Draper Coll.,
Harmar Papers,</q> II., 136-41.</note>
</p>

<p>
Gov. St. Clair arrived at Kaskaskia on March 5,
1790.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 182;
<q>St. Clair Papers,</q> II., 164.</note>
With his coming anarchy technically ceased, but naturally
the institution of an orderly government was a gradual
process. In August, Tardiveau wrote to Hamtramck
from Kaskaskia, saying that he hoped that Maj. Wyllys
had given Hamtramck such a specimen of the difficulty
of establishing a regular government and organizing the
militia in Illinois as would induce the sending of a few
regular troops from Vincennes. Even ten men would be
a help. The Indians daily stole horses, and Tardiveau
tried to raise a force to go and punish the offenders, but
he was effectually opposed by a lawless band of ringleaders.
A militia law and the Illinois civil power were
useless to remedy the matter. There were plenty of provisions
in Illinois to supply any soldiers that might be
sent.<note place='foot'>Tardiveau to Hamtramck, from
Kaskaskia, Aug. 1, 1790&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 302.</note> Tardiveau
was then lieutenant-colonel of the first
regiment of militia, and also judge of probate, having
been appointed by the governor.<note place='foot'><q>St.
Clair Papers,</q> II., 165.</note> Harmar replied that it
was utterly impracticable to comply with Tardiveau's
request for soldiers.<note place='foot'>Harmar to Hamtramck,
Sept. 3, 1790&mdash;<q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q>
II., 332.</note>
</p>

<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>

<p>
On June 20, 1788, a congressional committee reported
that there were about eighty families at Kaskaskia, twelve
at Prairie du Rocher, four or five at Fort Chartres and St.
Philips, and about fifty at Cahokia, making one hundred
and forty-six or one hundred and forty-seven families
in these villages.<note place='foot'><q>Jour. of
Cong.,</q> IV., 823.</note> In 1766-7, the same villages, with
Vincennes, were supposed to have about two thousand
inhabitants<note place='foot'>Pittman, <q>European Settlements on
the Miss.,</q> 55.</note>; and about five years later, 1772, there were
some fifteen hundred inhabitants in these villages, not
including Vincennes.<note place='foot'>Hutchins,
<q>Topographical Desc. of Va.</q> 36-8.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is not surprising that the population of the Illinois
country decreased from 1765 to 1790. During these years,
British and Americans had attempted to impose upon the
French settlers a form of government for which they had
neither desire nor aptitude. The attempt to immediately
transform a subject people was a signal failure, but neither
the attempt nor the failure was unique.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. The Land and Indian Questions. 1790 to 1809.</head>

<p>
A proclamation issued by Estevan Miro, Governor
and Intendant of the Provinces of Louisiana and Florida
in 1789, offered to immigrants a liberal donation of land,
graduated according to the number of laborers in the
family; freedom of religion and from payment of tithes,
although no public worship except Catholic would be
allowed; freedom from taxation; and a free market at
New Orleans for produce or manufactures. All settlers
must swear allegiance to Spain.<note place='foot'><q>St. Clair
Papers,</q> II. 122-3.</note> This proclamation came
at a time when the West was divided in opinion as to
whether to make war upon Spain for her closure of the
Mississippi or to secede from the United States and
become a part of Spain.<note place='foot'><q>Secret Jour. of Cong.,</q>
IV., 301-29.</note> It tended to continue the emigration
from the Illinois country to Spanish territory, for
public land was not yet for sale in Illinois.
</p>

<p>
To the professional rover, the inability to secure a title
to land was the cause of small concern, but the more
substantial and desirable the settler, the more concerned
was he about the matter. Settlement and improvements
were retarded. Before the affairs of the Ohio Company
had progressed far enough to permit sales of land to
settlers, the little company at Marietta saw, with deep
chagrin, thousands of settlers float by on their way to
Kentucky, where land could be bought.<note place='foot'><q>St.
Clair Papers,</q> I., 150.</note> Squatters in
Illinois were constantly expecting that the public lands
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
would soon be offered for sale. The natural result was
petitions for the right of preëmption, because without such
a right, the settler was in danger of losing whatever
improvements he had made. In 1790, James Piggott and
forty-five others petitioned for such a right. The petitioners
stated that they had settled since 1783 and had
suffered much from Indians. They could not cultivate
their land except under guard. Seventeen families had no
more tillable land than four could tend. The land on which
they lived was the property of two individuals.<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> I., 20.</note>
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/illus-1.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <figDesc>Illustration: Indian Cessions.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
Petitions from various classes of settlers, not provided
for by the acts of June 20, August 28, and August 29,
1788, led Congress to pass the act of March 3, 1791. By
this act, four hundred acres was to be given to each head
of a family who, in 1783, was resident in the Illinois
country or at Vincennes, and who had since moved from
the one to the other. The same donation was to be made
to all persons who had moved away, if they should return
within five years. Such persons should also have confirmed
to them the land they originally held. This was intended
to bring back persons who had gone to the Spanish side of
the Mississippi. Grants previously made by courts having
no authority should be confirmed to persons who had
made improvements, to an extent not exceeding four
hundred acres to any one person. As these lands had in
some cases been repeatedly sold, the parties making the
improvements were frequently guiltless of any knowledge
of fraud. The Cahokia commons were confirmed to that
village. One hundred acres was to be granted to each
militiaman enrolled on August 1, 1790, and who had
received no other grant.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes at Large,</q>
I., 221-2.</note> This act throws considerable
light on the causes of discontent then prevailing among
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
the settlers and on the conditions to which immigrants
came.
</p>

<p>
This same spring, about two hundred and fifty of the
inhabitants of Vincennes had gone to settle at New Madrid.<note place='foot'>Hamtramck
to Harmar, from Vincennes, Apr. 14, 1791&mdash;<q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 410.</note>
It is not strange that the act of March 3, 1791, made
provisions intended to induce the Americans who had emigrated
to the Spanish possessions to return. The history
of the threatened Spanish aggression upon the western
part of the United States is known in essence to anyone
who has made the slightest special study of the period at
which it was at its height. Morgan's scheme for a purchase
of land in Illinois was not carried out, and he turned
his attention to peopling his settlement at New Madrid.
Down the Mississippi to New Orleans seemed the natural
route for Illinois commerce. Slavery flourished unmolested
west of the Mississippi. In 1794, Baron de Carondolet
gave orders to the governor of Natchez to incite the
Chickasaw Indians to expel the Americans from Fort
Massac. The governor refused to obey the order, because
Fort Massac had been occupied by the Americans in
pursuance of a request by the Spanish representative at
the capital of the United States that the president would
put a stop to the proposed expedition of the French
against the Spanish. The claim was advanced by Carondolet
that the Americans had no right to the land on
which the fort stood, but that the land belonged to the
Chickasaws, who were independent allies of Spain. Two
other reasons given for not obeying the order were that it
would preclude the successful issue of the Spanish intrigue
for the separation of Kentucky from the United States,
and would hinder negotiations, then pending, for a commercial
treaty between Spain and the United States.<note place='foot'><q>Draper MSS.,
Translation of Spanish Documents,</q> 49-60.</note>
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
Carondolet regarded the Indians as Spain's best defence
against the Americans,<note place='foot'>Carondolet to
Duke of Alcudia, from New Orleans, Sept. 27, 1793&mdash;<q>Draper
MSS., Translation of Spanish Documents.</q> 24, second pagination of
typewritten matter.</note> yet the whites prepared for defence,
and in anticipation of the proposed French expedition of
George Rogers Clark, a garrison of thirty men and an
officer was placed at Ste. Genevieve, opposite Kaskaskia.
Carondolet said: <q>This will suffice to prevent the smuggling
carried on by the Americans of the settlement of Kaskaskias
situated opposite, which increases daily.</q><note place='foot'>Carondolet to
&mdash;&mdash;,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 33, first pagination of matter
in long hand.</note>
</p>

<p>
Early in 1796, a petition was sent from Kaskaskia to Congress.
The petitioners desired that they might be permitted
to locate their donation of four hundred acres per family
on Long Prairie, a few miles above Kaskaskia, on the Kaskaskia
River, and that the expense of surveying the land
might be paid by the United States. The act granting
the donation-land had provided for its location between
the Kaskaskia and the Mississippi. This land the petitioners
declared to be private land and some of it was of
poor quality.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q> I., 69.</note>
Confirmation of land claims directed to be
made upon the Governor's visit in 1790 were delayed by
the lack of a surveyor and the poverty of the
inhabitants.<note place='foot'><q>St. Clair Papers,</q> II., 398-9.</note>
The petition was signed by John Edgar, William Morrison,
William St. Clair, and John Demoulin<note place='foot'>John
Edgar, for years the wealthiest citizen of Illinois, was born in Ireland,
came to Kaskaskia in 1784, and soon became a large landholder by
purchasing French donation-rights. Wm. Morrison, a native of Bucks
county, Pa., came from Philadelphia to Kaskaskia in 1790 and became a
leading merchant and shipper. Wm. St. Clair, a son of James St. Clair,
once captain in the Irish Brigade in the service of France, was the first clerk
of the court of St. Clair county. John Dumoulin (or De Moulin) was a Swiss.
In 1790, he was a judge of the Court of Common Pleas in the Cahokia
district of St. Clair county.</note> <q>for the inhabitants
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
of the counties of St. Clair and Randolph</q><note place='foot'>St.
Clair county had been formed in 1790 and Randolph county in 1795.
In 1796, they were the only counties lying wholly within the present State of
Illinois. A strip of the eastern part of Illinois lay in Knox county. The
line between St. Clair and Randolph was an east-and-west line, a little south
of New Design, Randolph lying to the south&mdash;<q>St. Clair Papers,</q> II., 165,
166, 345.</note>&mdash;the
Illinois counties. The petitioners ranked high in the
mercantile and legal life of the Illinois settlements, but
they must have been novices in the art of petitioning if
they thought that a petition signed by four men from the
Illinois country, with no sign of their being legally representative,
would be regarded by Congress as an expression
of the opinion of the Northwest Territory. The part of
the petition relating to lands was granted, but the major
part, which related to other subjects, was denied on the
ground that the petitioners probably did not represent
public sentiment.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q> I., 68-9; <q>Ind.
Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 447-52, 452-55.</note> During this same year Congress denied
a number of petitions for the right of preëmption in the
Northwest Territory, because such a right would encourage
illegal settling. It was also during this year that the first
sales of public land in the Northwest Territory were
authorized. The land to be sold was in what is now Ohio.
No tract of less than four thousand acres could be purchased.<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> I., 68; Poore, <q>Desc. Catalogue of Govt. Publications,</q>
43; <q>Laws of U. S. Relating to Pub. Lands,</q> 420-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
In 1800, two hundred and sixty-eight inhabitants of
Illinois, chiefly French, petitioned Congress that Indian
titles to land in the southern part of Illinois might be
extinguished and the land offered for sale; that tracts of
land at the distance of a day's journey from each other,
lying between Vincennes and the Illinois settlements,
might be ceded to such persons as would keep taverns, and
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
that one or two garrisons might be stationed in Illinois.
The petitioners state that the Kaskaskia tribe of Indians
numbered not more than fifteen members and that their
title to land could be easily extinguished; that not enough
land is open to settlement to admit a population sufficient
to support ordinary county establishments; that roads are
much needed, and that many of the inhabitants are crossing
the Mississippi with their slaves. The petition was
not considered.<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q>
II., 455-61; <q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 6th Cong., 735.</note>
</p>

<p>
A new factor now appears in the forces affecting Illinois
settlement. The Northwest Territory having advanced to
the second grade of territorial government, in December,
1799, its delegate took his seat in Congress. The step
was an important one for the struggling colony. Before
this time such petitions as were prepared by inhabitants
of the territory for the consideration of Congress
had been subjected to all the vicissitudes of being addressed
to some public officer or of being confided to some member
of Congress who represented a different portion of the
country. Up to this time the public lands could only be
bought in tracts of four thousand acres. Largely through
the influence of the delegate from the Northwest Territory,
a bill was passed which authorized the sale of sections and
half-sections. In consequence, emigration soon began to
flow rapidly into Ohio. Land in Illinois was not yet
offered for sale, but this bill is important because the policy
of offering land in smaller tracts was to continue.<note place='foot'><q>Annals
of Cong.,</q> 6th Cong., 537-538; Poore, <q>Desc. Catalogue of
Govt. Publications,</q> 43; <q>Statutes at Large,</q> II., 73-8.</note>
</p>

<p>
The territorial delegate was also active in procuring the
passage of a bill for the division of the Northwest Territory.
While the bill was pending, a petition from Illinois,
praying for the division and for the establishment of such
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
a government in the western part as was provided for by
the Ordinance of 1787, was presented. The act for
division was signed by the President on May 7, 1800; it
formed Indiana Territory, with Vincennes as its capital.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> II., 58-9; <q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 6th Cong., 507,
699, 701.</note>
</p>

<p>
The propositions made by a convention of representatives
elected by the citizens of Indiana to prepare petitions
to Congress, near the close of 1802, illustrate the needs of
the time. It was desired that the Indian title to land lying
in Southern Illinois and Southwestern Indiana might be
extinguished and the land sold in smaller tracts and at a
lower price;<note place='foot'>According to the Act
of May 10, 1800, public land was to be sold in
tracts, not smaller than one-half sections, and for a minimum price of two
dollars per acre. One-twentieth of the purchase-money should be paid at
the time of sale, the remainder of one-fourth of the price within forty days,
one-fourth in two years, one-fourth in three years, and one-fourth in four
years. On the last three payments, interest should be paid at six per cent
from the date of sale, and on the same three payments a discount of eight
per cent per year should be granted for prepayment. Land unpaid for reverted
to the United States&mdash;<q>Statutes at Large,</q> II., 73-8.</note>
that a preëmption act might be passed; that
a grant of seminary and school lands might be made; that
land for taverns, twenty miles or less apart, might be
granted along certain specified routes; that donation-lands
might be chosen in separate tracts, instead of in three
specified areas, in order to avoid <q>absolutely useless</q>
prairies, and also lands claimed by ancient grants; and that
the qualification of a freehold of fifty acres of land, prescribed
for the electors of representatives to the territorial
legislature, might be changed to manhood suffrage, because
the freehold qualification was said to tend <q>to throw too
great a weight in the scale of wealth.</q> The petition was
considered in committees, but it led to no legislation.<note place='foot'><q>Ind.
Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 461-70; <q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 8th Cong.,
1st Sess., 1023-4; 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 293-4, 466-8.</note>
</p>

<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>

<p>
None of the above complaints was better founded than
that concerning the restriction of the suffrage, and it is
well to note subsequent proceedings in regard to it. No
qualification less suitable to the time and place could well
have been devised, and this is especially true of the Illinois
portion of the territory, because there unsettled French
claims were to delay the sales of public lands until 1814,
and thus early settlers could neither buy land nor vote
unless they owned it, unless indeed they purchased land
claims from the needy and unbusiness-like French. An
interesting petition of 1807 from the settlement on Richland
Creek,<note place='foot'>A western tributary of the lower
part of the Kaskaskia.</note> for the right of preëmption, throws light upon
conditions then obtaining. The petitioner inclosed a map
of the settlement, with the following explanation: <q>Those
persons whose names are enclosed in said plot, within surveyed
lines, have confirmed and located rights, amounting
to 3,775 acres; ... the residue of the said settlers,
occupying about 6,000 acres of land, have, without any
right, settled upon the public land.</q> The map shows that
there were eleven owners and twenty-two squatters.<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> I., 591.</note> As
the law then stood, the twenty-two squatters, occupying
more than three-fifths of the land, could not vote. The
eleven land-owners must have secured their land either
under the acts of 1788 or that of 1791, or by the purchase
of French claims, a trade vigorously carried on. In 1808,<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> II., 469; Poore, <q>Charters and Constitutions,</q>
821, 832, 964, 973; McMaster, <q>Acquisition of the ... Rights of Man in
Am.,</q> 111-22; <q>Proceedings and Debates of the Va. State Conv. of 1829-30,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>; Mowry, <q>The Dorr War,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note>
Congress so far extended the suffrage in Indiana as to
make the ownership of a town lot worth one hundred
dollars an alternative qualification to the possession of a
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
freehold of fifty acres. This was in advance of the law in
some of the Eastern states.
</p>

<p>
After 1802, the land question can not be traced without
reference to the Indian question in Illinois. That question
became important as soon as American occupation was
assured, and it remained important for fifty years after the
Revolution. The desire of the American settlers for land
was directly counter to the desire of the Indians to preserve
their hunting-grounds. Before the close of the eighteenth
century, the list of bloody deeds in Illinois had grown
long.<note place='foot'><q>Draper Coll., Ill. MSS.,</q> 37, 39,
43, 54, 57, 58, 67, 102, 104, 107,
108, 113; <q>Pub. Lands,</q> I., 20; <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> VII., 300; <q><q>Father
Clark;</q> or, The Pioneer Preacher,</q> 181 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></note>
The United States Government appreciated the
gravity of the situation and early made efforts to purchase
the land from the Indians. That part of the treaty of
Greenville, of 1795, which affected Illinois, extinguished
the Indian title to a tract six miles square, at the mouth of
Chicago River; one six miles square, at Peoria; one twelve
miles square, near the mouth of the Illinois River; the
post of Fort Massac, and the land in the possession of the
whites.<note place='foot'><q>Indian Aff.,</q> I., 562;
<q>An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q> 18,
Pt. 2, 656-7, Plates CXXIV., CXXV.; see map of Indian
cessions, 1795-1809.</note> The treaty of Fort Wayne, in 1803, ceded four
square miles or less, at the salt springs on Saline Creek, and
some land west and southwest from Vincennes. This treaty,
with another made in the following August, ceded three
tracts of land, each one mile square, between Vincennes
and Kaskaskia, to be sites for taverns.<note place='foot'><q>An.
Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q> 18, Pt. 2, 656-7; Plates
CXXIV., CXXV.; <q>Indian Aff.,</q> I., 688; see
map of Indian cessions.</note> The treaty of
Vincennes, of August, 1803, ceded land in Illinois bounded
by the Ohio, the Mississippi, the Illinois, and the western
watershed of the Wabash, except three hundred and fifty
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
acres near Kaskaskia, and twelve hundred and eighty
acres to be located. This last treaty was made with the
depleted Kaskaskia tribe.<note place='foot'><q>Indian Aff.,</q> I.,
687; <q>An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q> 18,
Pt. 2, 664-5, Plate CXXIV.; see map of Indian
cessions.</note> As the claims of various tribes
overlapped, an Indian treaty rarely signifies that all controversy
in regard to the land ceded is at an end.
Frequently one or more treaties must yet be made with
other tribes, and frequently a tribe refuses to abide by its
agreement.
</p>

<p>
Previous to 1804, no land was sold in the Northwest
Territory west of the mouth of the Kentucky River. An
act of March 26 of that year provided for the opening of
a land-office at Detroit to sell lands north of Ohio; one at
Vincennes to sell lands in its vicinity ceded by the treaty
of Fort Wayne; and one at Kaskaskia to sell so much of
the land ceded by the treaty of Vincennes (August, 1803)
as was not claimed by any other tribe than those represented
in the cession. The register and the receiver of
public moneys of these respective districts were to be
commissioners to settle private land claims. Evidences of
claims should be filed before January 1, 1805, and after
the adjustment of claims the public lands should be sold
at auction to the highest bidder. Two dollars per acre
was to be the minimum price; no land should be sold
in less than quarter-sections, except fractional portions
caused by irregularities in topography or survey, and lands
unsold after the auction might be sold at private sale.
Although this act provided for the sale of public lands in
Illinois after private claims should have been satisfied, and
directed that such claims should be filed not later than
January 1, 1805, Congress repeatedly extended the time
for the filing of claims, and ten years after the passage of
this act there were still unsatisfied claims.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> II., 277-83, 343-5, 446-8, 517, 590-1.</note> Not until
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
1814 did sales of public land begin in Illinois. The delay
retarded immigration of that class which would have made
the most desirable citizens.
</p>

<p>
By the treaty of St. Louis, November 3, 1804, the Sauk
and Foxes ceded that part of Illinois west of the Illinois
and Fox rivers. Black Hawk, the principal chief of the
Sauk, did not sign the treaty.<note place='foot'><q>Indian
Aff.,</q> I., 693-4; <q>An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q>
18, Pt. 2, 666-7, Plate CXXIV.; see map of
Indian cessions.</note> By the treaty of Vincennes,
1805, the Piankashaws ceded a tract lying between the
lower Wabash and its western watershed.<note place='foot'><q>Indian
Aff.,</q> I., 704-5; <q>An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q>
18, Pt. 2, 672-3, Plate CXXIV.; see map of Indian cessions.</note> No more Indian
titles to land in Illinois were extinguished, and no public
land was sold in Illinois until after that part of the country
became a separate territory.
</p>

<p>
Early in 1806, there came to Congress from Illinois a
petition which betrayed the anxiety of the French settlers,
and of the Americans who had bought French claims, lest
the peculiar shape of their holdings should be disturbed by
the orderly system of government surveys. The petitioners
asked that a line might be run from a point north of
Cahokia to an unspecified river south of Kaskaskia, in
such a manner as to include all settlements between the
two points, and that the land so included be exempt from
the mode of survey and terms of sale of other public lands
of the United States. The petition was apparently not
reported upon, but a detailed map of the region referred
to shows that the holdings were left in their bewildering
complexity.<note place='foot'><q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 9th
Cong., 1st Sess., 339; see map in the <q>Hist.
of Randolph, Monroe, and Perry Counties, Ill.,</q> frontispiece.</note>
</p>

<p>
By the time Indiana Territory was divided some progress
had been made in extinguishing Indian titles, and some
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
also in investigating land claims of the French and their
assignees; but the American immigrant had still the hard
choice of buying a French claim with uncertain title or
squatting on government land with the risk of losing
whatever improvement he might make, and often the
added risk of being killed by the suspicious, hostile,
untrustworthy Indians. This was one class of hindrances
to settlement. Another hindrance, next to be noticed, was
the unstable governmental conditions following the anarchy
already recited.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Government Succeeding the Period
of Anarchy, 1790 to 1809.</head>

<p>
When St. Clair County was formed, in 1790, it was
made to include all the settlements of the Northwest
Territory to the westward of Vincennes. On account
of its geographical extent it was divided into three judicial
districts, but it could not be made into three separate
counties, because there were not enough men capable of
holding office to furnish the necessary officials. The American
settlers were few and a large proportion of them were
unskilled in matters of government, while the French were
totally unfit to govern. In 1795, St. Clair, when referring
to conditions in 1790, wrote that since then the population
of Illinois had decreased considerably.<note place='foot'>St. Clair to
Judge Turner, from Marietta, May 2, 1795&mdash;<q>St. Clair
Papers,</q> II., 348-9.</note> Combining this
decrease with the fact that there were in the settlements in
what is now Missouri 1491 inhabitants in 1785, 2093 in
1788, and 6028, including 883 slaves, in 1799,<note place='foot'>Edwards,
<q>Great West,</q> 271, 274-5; figures from the official census.</note> the conclusion
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
is inevitable that emigration across the Mississippi
was the immediate cause of the decrease in Illinois.
</p>

<p>
In 1795, notwithstanding the decreased population, and
perhaps in the hope of checking the decrease, St. Clair
County was divided by proclamation of Governor St. Clair.
The division was by an east and west line running a little
south of the settlement of New Design.<note place='foot'>See
map of Illinois country.</note> St. Clair County
lay to the north, Randolph County to the south of the
line.<note place='foot'><q>St. Clair Papers,</q> I., 193; II., 345.</note>
</p>

<p>
The early laws of the Northwest Territory throw light
upon the conditions existing upon the frontier. Minute
provisions for establishing and maintaining ferries, with no
mention of bridges, indicate the primitive methods of
travel.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of N.-W. Ter.,</q> 1800, I.,
47-51.</note> Millers were required to use a prescribed set of
measures and to grind for a prescribed toll, the toll for the
use of a horse-mill being higher than that for a water-mill,
unless the owner of the grain furnished the
horses.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1800, I., 58-61.</note>
Guide-posts were to be put up at the forks of every public
road.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1800, I.,
178.</note> No stray stock should be taken up between the
first of April and the first of November, unless the stray
should have broken into the inclosure of the
taker-up.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1800, I., 61-71.</note> In
those days stock was turned out and crops were fenced in.
Prairies or cleared land were not to be fired except between
December 1 and March 10, unless upon one's own
land.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1800, I., 119-21.</note>
The following rates of county taxation were prescribed:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Horses, per head, not more than $.50</l>
<l>Neat cattle, not more than  .12-½</l>
<l>Bond servant, not more than 1.00</l>
<l>Single man, 21 yrs. or older, with less than
$200 worth of property, not more than 2.00 nor less than .50</l>
<l>Retail merchants, not more than 10.00<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
1800, I., 197.</note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<p>
A bounty, varying at different times between 1799 and
1810 from 50 cents to $2 per head, was given for killing
wolves.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of N.-W. Ter., 1800,</q> I.,
226-7; <q>Laws of Ill. Ter., 1815-16;</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1816-17, 4;
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 17-19.</note> Imprisonment for debt, a law antedating by
many years similar laws in several of the other parts of the
United States, was practically abolished.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of N.-W. Ter.,
1800,</q> I., 157-61; McMaster, <q>Acquisition
of the Pol., Social and Industrial Rights of Man in Am.,</q> 64-66; 16th Cong.,
2d Sess., <q>Rept. of Com. No. 63.</q></note> A frontier
region does not have that social stratification which makes
oppression of the debtor class easy. A county too poor
to build a log jail without difficulty is not likely to be so
senseless as to make a practice of confining and boarding
its debtor class.
</p>

<p>
For the purpose of taxation land was to be listed in
three classes according to value. No specification as to the
value of the respective classes was prescribed. The tax
was eighty-five, sixty, or twenty-five cents per one hundred
acres, according as land was first, second, or third
class. No unimproved land in Illinois was to be listed
higher than second class.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of N.-W.
Ter., 1800,</q> I., 184-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
The laws above cited were enacted by the legislature of
the Northwest Territory. In May, 1800, that territory was
divided, the western part, including Illinois, becoming
Indiana Territory. This made the Illinois country more
distinctly frontier by again reducing it to the first grade of
territorial government, Indiana Territory, as such, not being
represented in Congress until December, 1805.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes at
Large,</q> II., 58-9; <q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 6th Cong., 1007;
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 275.</note> Among
the reasons advanced for dividing the Northwest Territory
was the fact that in five years there had been but one
court for criminal cases in the three western
counties.<note place='foot'><q>Misc.,</q> I., 206-7.</note>
</p>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<p>
Illinois soon sought admission to the second grade of
territorial government. In April, 1801, John Edgar wrote
from Kaskaskia to St. Clair: <q>During a few weeks past, we
have put into circulation petitions addressed to Governor
Harrison, for a General Assembly, and we have had the
satisfaction to find that about nine-tenths of the inhabitants
of the counties of St. Clair and Randolph approve of
the measure, a great proportion of whom have already put
their signatures to the petition.... I have no doubt
but that the undertaking will meet with early success, so as
to admit of the House of Representatives meeting in the
fall.</q><note place='foot'><q>St. Clair Papers,</q> II.,
533-4.</note> The movement for advancement to the second
grade was not, however, destined to such early success,
and when it did take place such a change had occurred
that Illinois was much enraged.
</p>

<p>
The Illinois country early became restive under the
government of Indiana Territory. Much the same causes
for discontent existed as had caused Kentucky to wish to
separate from Virginia, Tennessee from North Carolina,
and the country west of the Alleghanies from the United
States. In each case a frontier minority saw its wishes, if
not its rights, infringed by a more eastern majority. In
each case the eastern people were themselves too weak to
furnish sufficient succor to the struggling West. The
conflict was natural and inevitable. The grave charge
against Governor Harrison, who had large powers of patronage,
was local favoritism. So discontented was Illinois,
that in 1803 it had petitioned for annexation to the territory
of Louisiana when such territory should be formed.<note place='foot'><q>Annals
of Cong.,</q> 8th Cong., 1st Sess., 489, 1659-60.</note>
Antagonism to the Indiana government became still more
bitter when, in December, 1804, after an election which
was so hurried that an outlying county did not get to vote,
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
the territory entered the second grade of territorial
government.<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 486-7.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the summer of 1805, discontent in Illinois was again
expressed in a memorial to Congress. About three hundred
and fifty inhabitants of the region petitioned for a
division of Indiana Territory, From the Illinois settlements
to the capital, Vincennes, was said to be one hundred
and eighty miles, <q>through a dreary and inhospitable
wilderness, uninhabited, and which during one part of the
year, can scarcely afford water sufficient to sustain nature,
and that of the most indifferent quality, besides presenting
other hardships equally severe, while in another it is part
under water, and in places to the extent of some miles, by
which the road is rendered almost impassable, and the
traveler is not only subjected to the greatest difficulties,
but his life placed in the most imminent danger.</q> It
resulted that the attendance of Illinois inhabitants upon
either the legislature or the supreme court was fraught
with many inconveniences. Because of the extensive
prairies between Illinois and Vincennes, <q>a communication
between them and the settlements east of that river [the
Wabash] can not in the common course of things, for
centuries yet to come, be supported with the least benefit,
or be of the least moment to either of them.</q> Illinois
objected to having been precipitated into the second grade
of government. In the election for that purpose, said the
memorialists, only Knox county voted in the affirmative,
and Wayne county did not vote, because the writs of
election arrived too late. Since entering the second grade
the County of Wayne (Michigan) had been struck off. It
was believed that if the prayer for separation should be
granted, the rage for emigration to Louisiana would, in
great measure, cease, the value of public lands in Illinois
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
would be increased, and their sale would also be more
rapid, while an increased population would render Illinois
flourishing and self-supporting rather than a claimant for
governmental support.<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist. Soc.
Pub.,</q> II., 483-92; original among the House files at
Washington.</note>
</p>

<p>
At the same time that Congress received the above
memorial, it received a petition from a majority of the
members of the respective houses of the Indiana legislature.
This petition asked that the freehold qualification
for electors be abolished; that Indiana Territory be not
divided, and that the undivided territory be soon made a
state. It was said that the people were too poor to
support a divided government, and that as the general
court met annually in each county it was slight hardship
to the frontier to have the supreme court meet at Vincennes.<note place='foot'><q>Ind.
Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 476-83.</note>
It was probably true at this time, as it certainly
was in 1807, that the general court met as above stated.
Appeal by bill of exceptions was, however, allowed. The
supreme court had no original, exclusive jurisdiction.<note place='foot'><q>Laws
of Ind. Ter.,</q> 1807, pp. 12-13.</note>
Nothing daunted by this memorial from the legislature,
Illinois, in a short time, prepared another memorial&mdash;this
time with twenty signatures. This adds to the grievances
recited in the previous memorial that the wealthy appeal
cases against the Illinois poor to the supreme court at
Vincennes; that landholders on the Wabash are interested
in preventing the population of lands on the Mississippi;
that preëmption is needed, and that it is hoped that the
general government will not pass unnoticed the act of the
last legislature authorizing the importation of slaves into
the territory. It violates the Ordinance of 1787. The
memorialists desired such importation, but it must be
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
authorized by Congress to be legal. The population of
Illinois was given as follows:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
By the census of April 1, 1801: 2,361
</p>

<p>
Inhabitants of Prairie du Chien and on the
Illinois River, not included in above: 550
</p>

<p>
<q>Emigration</q> since 1801, at least one-third
increase: 750
</p>

<p>
Settlements on the Ohio River: 650
</p>

<p>
4,311<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 498-506.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The truth of some of the complaints from Illinois is
apparent. That a land company on the Wabash wished
to hinder settlement on the Mississippi is probably true,
for Matthew Lyon, of Kentucky, said in Congress, in the
winter of 1805-6: <q>The price of lands is various. I
know of two hundred thousand acres of land on the
Wabash, which is offered for sale at twenty cents per
acre.</q><note place='foot'><q>Annals of Cong.,</q>
9th Cong., 1st Session, 469.</note> It is to be presumed that the company making
the offer could not give a secure title to the land.
</p>

<p>
In 1806, a congressional committee reported on the
various memorials and petitions from Illinois, but the
report led to no legislation and thus settled nothing, and
in 1807 petitioning continued.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
466-8; <q>Misc.,</q> I., 450; <q>Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II.,
494-7.</note> Illinois again petitioned
for separation from the remainder of Indiana Territory,
this petition bearing seventeen signatures. An inclosed
census is lost, but a population of five thousand is spoken
of. A new and significant paragraph occurs: <q>When
your Memorialists contemplate the probable movements
which may arise out of an European peace, now apparently
about to take place, they cannot but feel the importance
of union, of energy, of population on this shore of the
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
Mississippi&mdash;they cannot but shudder at the horrors which
may arise from a <emph>disaffection in the West</emph>....</q> A
government was needed, and that of Indiana Territory
was not acceptable to the people of Illinois. One hundred
and two inhabitants of Illinois sent a counter-petition, in
which they said that Illinois had paid no taxes and needed
no separate government, also that the committee that
prepared the above petition was not legally chosen. Most
of the signers of the petition were Americans, while most
of the signers of the counter-petition were French, forty-two
of the latter being illiterate.<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist.
Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 505-10.</note> The report of a congressional
committee on the petition was adverse,<note place='foot'><q>H.
J.,</q> 8th and 9th Cong., 611.</note> as was
also a report on three petitions for division that came from
Illinois in the spring of 1808.<note place='foot'><q>Annals of
Cong.,</q> 10th Cong., 1st Sess., 1976, 2067.</note> In the following December,
the representative of Indiana Territory in Congress was
appointed chairman of a committee to consider the expediency
of dividing the territory, and to this committee
petitions both for and against division were referred.
This territorial delegate was in favor of division, and his
committee presented a favorable report, in which the
number of inhabitants of Indiana east of the Wabash was
estimated to be seventeen thousand, and the number west
of the Wabash to be eleven thousand&mdash;numbers thought
to be sufficiently large to justify division, and an estimate
which the census of 1810 proves to have been almost
correct. In February, 1809, the bill providing for the
division so ardently desired by Illinois was approved, the
division to take place on the first of the next March.
The western division was to be known as Illinois Territory
and was to have for its eastern boundary a line due north
from Vincennes to the Canadian line.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
10th Cong., 2d Sess., 971-3, 1093; <q>Stat. at Large,</q> II.,
514-16.</note> In the debate in
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
the House of Representatives, preceding the passage of
the bill for division, the arguments in its favor were that
the Wabash was a natural dividing line; that a wide
extent of wilderness intervened between Vincennes and
the western settlements; that the power of the executive
was enervated by the dispersed condition of the settlements;
that to render justice was almost impossible; that
the United States would be more than compensated for
the increased expense by the rise in value of the public
lands. Opponents of the bill declared that the complaints
made by Illinois were common to many parts of the
country; that the number of officers would be needlessly
increased by the proposed division; and that <q>a compliance
with this petition would but serve to foster their
factions, and produce more petitions.</q> No significant
geographical division of the vote on the bill is
apparent.<note place='foot'><q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 10th Cong., 2d Sess., 1093-4.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Obstacles to Immigration. 1790 to 1809.</head>

<p>
In addition to the inability to secure land titles on account
of unsettled French claims, to the presence of Indians
and to the discontent with the government of Indiana
Territory, almost every cause which made settlement on
the frontier difficult was found in the Illinois country in
its most pronounced form, because Illinois was the far
corner of the frontier. The census reports of the United
Status give the following statistics of population:
</p>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{1cm} p{1cm} p{1cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(10) r r r'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>1790.</cell><cell>1800.</cell><cell>1810.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kentucky</cell><cell>73,677</cell><cell>220,955</cell>
<cell>406,511</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ohio</cell><cell></cell><cell>45,365</cell><cell>230,760</cell></row>
<row><cell>Indiana</cell><cell></cell><cell>2,517</cell><cell>24,520</cell></row>
<row><cell>Illinois</cell><cell></cell><cell>2,458</cell><cell>12,282</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
These figures show how conspicuously small was the
immigration to Illinois. Enough has already been said
to show some of the reasons for this sluggish settlement.
When, in 1793, Governor St. Clair wrote to Alexander Hamilton,
<q>In compassion to a poor devil banished to another
planet, tell me what is doing in yours, if you can snatch a
moment from the weighty cares of your office,</q><note place='foot'><q>St.
Clair Papers,</q> II., 318.</note> he
doubtless felt that the language was not too strong, and
voiced a feeling of loneliness that was common to the
settlers. Nor was there a lack of land in the East to
make westward movement imperative. Massachusetts was
much opposed to her people emigrating to Ohio, because
she wished them to settle on her own eastern frontier
(Maine), and Vermont and New York had vacant lands.<note place='foot'>Cutler,
<q>Life of Manasseh Cutler,</q> II., 382.</note>
</p>

<p>
One who settled in Illinois at this period came through
danger to danger, for Indians lurked in the woods and
malaria waited in the lowlands. The journey made by
the immigrants was tedious and difficult, and was often
rendered dangerous by precipitous and rough hills and
swollen streams, if the journey was overland, or by snags,
shoals and rapids, if by water. A large proportion of the
settlers came from Maryland, Virginia, or the Carolinas.
Those from Virginia and Maryland were induced to
emigrate by the glowing descriptions of the Illinois country
given by the soldiers of George Rogers Clark, and
these soldiers sometimes led the first contingent. A
typical Virginia settlement in Illinois was that called New
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
Design, located in what is now Monroe county, between
Kaskaskia and Cahokia. Founded about 1786 by a native
of Berkeley county, the settlement received important
additions in 1793, and four years later a party of more
than one hundred and fifty arrived from near the headwaters
of the south branch of the Potomac, this last
contingent led by a Baptist minister, who had organized a
church on a previous visit.<note place='foot'><q><q>Father Clark,</q>
or the Pioneer Preacher,</q> 202; Moses, <q>Illinois,</q>
I., 228.</note> In general, persons Scotch-Irish
by birth were opposed to slavery, as were also the
members of the Quaker church. This caused a considerable
emigration from the Carolinas. Another motive for
people from all sections was that expressed by settlers of
Illinois, in 1806, when they said that they came west in
order to secure <q>such an establishment in land as they
despaired of ever being able to procure in the old
settlements.</q><note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q> I., 256.</note>
We have seen how long deferred was the
fulfillment of their hope of getting a title to the coveted
land. Although the East was not crowded, it is true that
land there was more expensive than that of the same
quality in the West. In 1806, three dollars per acre was
the maximum price in even the settled parts of Indiana
Territory, while fifty dollars per acre had been paid for
choice Kentucky land.<note place='foot'><q>Annals of Cong.,</q>
9th Cong., 1st Sess., 469. The land bought in
Kentucky was probably near Eddyville, which the purchaser founded.</note>
</p>

<p>
The greater number of immigrants came by water, but
a family too poor to travel thus, or whose starting-point
was not near a navigable stream, could come overland.
Illinois was favored by having a number of large rivers
leading toward it; the Ohio, Kentucky, Cumberland, Tennessee,
and their tributaries were much used by emigrants.
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
The chief route by land was the Wilderness Road, over
which thousands of the inhabitants of Kentucky had come.
Its existence helps to explain the wonderful growth of
Kentucky&mdash;in 1774 the first cabin, in 1790 a population of
73,000. It crossed the mountains at Cumberland Gap,
wound its way by the most convenient course to Crab
Orchard, and was early extended to the Falls of the Ohio
and later to Vincennes and St. Louis. The legislature of
Kentucky provided, in 1795, that the road from Cumberland
Gap to Crab Orchard should be made perfectly commodious
and passable for wagons carrying a weight of one ton, and
appropriated two thousand pounds for the work. Two
years later five hundred dollars were appropriated for the
repair of the road, and the highway was made a turnpike
with prescribed toll, although it did not become such a
road as the word turnpike suggests.<note place='foot'>Littell, <q>Laws of Ky.,</q>
I., 275-7, 687; Speed, <q>The Wilderness Road,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
A traveler of 1807 described the river craft of the period.
The smallest kind in use was a simple log canoe. This
was followed by the pirogue, which was a larger kind of
canoe and sufficiently strong and capacious to carry from
twelve to fifteen barrels of salt. Skiffs were built of all
sizes, from five hundred to twenty thousand pounds burden,
and batteaux were the same as the larger skiffs, being
indifferently known by either name. Kentucky boats were
strong frames of an oblong form, varying in size from
twenty to fifty feet in length and from ten to fourteen in
breadth, were sided and roofed, and guided by huge oars.
New Orleans boats resembled Kentucky boats, but were
larger and stronger and had arched roofs. The largest
could carry four hundred and fifty barrels of flour. Keel
boats were generally built from forty to eighty feet in
length and from seven to nine feet in width. The largest
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
required one man to steer and two to row in descending
the Ohio, and would carry about one hundred barrels of
salt; but to ascend the stream, at least six or eight men
were required to make any considerable progress. A barge
would carry from four thousand to sixty thousand pounds,
and required four men, besides the helmsman, to descend
the river, while to return with a load from eight to twelve
men were required.<note place='foot'>Schultz, <q>Travels on
an Inland Voyage,</q> I., 129-32.</note>
</p>

<p>
Shipments of produce from Illinois were usually made
in flat-bottomed boats of fifteen tons burden. Such a
boat cost about one hundred dollars, the crew of five
men was paid one hundred dollars each, the support
of the crew was reckoned at one hundred dollars, and
insurance at one hundred dollars, thus making a freightage
cost of eight hundred dollars for fifteen tons. The boat
was either set adrift or sold for the price of firewood
at New Orleans. It was estimated that the use of boats
of four hundred and fifty tons burden would save four
dollars per barrel on shipping flour to New Orleans, where
flour had often sold at less than three dollars per barrel,
but such boats were not yet used in the West.<note place='foot'><q>Annals
of Cong.,</q> 9th Cong., 1st Sess., 1049. Speech by Matthew
Lyon of Kentucky.</note> Canoes
cost an emigrant from one to three dollars; pirogues, five
to twenty dollars; small skiffs, five to ten dollars; large
skiffs or batteaux, twenty to fifty dollars; Kentucky and
New Orleans boats, one dollar to one and one-half dollars
per foot; keel boats, two dollars and a half to three
dollars per foot; and barges, four to five dollars per
foot.<note place='foot'>Schultz, <q>Travels on an Inland Voyage,</q> I., 132.</note>
</p>

<p>
Horses, cattle, and household goods were carried on
boats. Travel by either land or water was beset with
difficulties. The river, without pilot or dredge, had dangers
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
peculiar to itself. Sometimes, when traveling overland,
a broken wheel or axle, or a horse lost or stolen by
Indians, caused protracted and vexatious delays. It is
well to notice, also, that to travel a given distance into the
wilderness was more than twice as difficult as to travel
one-half that distance, because of the constantly increasing
separation between the traveler and what had previously
been his base of supplies.<note place='foot'>For
vivid accounts of journeys between the East and Ohio, giving an
excellent idea of the difficulties of transit, in the period 1795-1809, see
Cutler, <q>Life and Times of Ephraim Cutler,</q> 17-22, 38-41, 90-103; also,
many passages in Cutler, <q>Life, Journals and Corr. of Rev. Manasseh Cutler.</q>
A similar journey made in 1790 is described in <q>St. Clair Papers,</q> II., 164.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes immigrants debarked at Fort Massac and
completed their journey by land. Two roads led from
Fort Massac, one called the lower road and the other
the upper road, the former, practicable only in the dry
season and then only for travel on foot or on horseback,
was some eighty miles long, while the latter was one hundred
and fifty miles long. Roads of a like character
connected Kaskaskia and Cahokia.<note place='foot'>Collot,
<q>Journey in N. A.,</q> I., 192-3, 239.</note>
</p>

<p>
A party of more than one hundred and fifty, which
came from Virginia to the New Design settlement in 1797,
set out from the south branch of the Potomac. They came
from Redstone (now Brownsville), on the Monongahela, to
Fort Massac, on flat-boats, and then by land, in twenty-one
days, to New Design. The summer was wet and hot, a
malignant fever broke out among the newcomers, and one-half
of them died before winter. The old settlers were
not affected by the fever, but they were too few to properly
care for so many immigrants.<note place='foot'><q><q>Father
Clark,</q> or The Pioneer Preacher,</q> 193.</note>
</p>

<p>
Commerce in Illinois was in its infancy. Some cattle,
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
corn, pork, and various other commodities were sent at
irregular intervals to New Orleans.<note place='foot'>Schultz,
<q>Travels on an Inland Voyage,</q> II., 38.</note> The fur trade was
carried on much as under the French régime. Salt was
made at the salt springs on Saline Creek, the labor being
performed chiefly by Kentucky and Tennessee slaves
under the supervision of contractors who leased the works
from the United States. The contractors agreed to sell no
salt at the works for more than fifty cents per bushel, but
by means of silent partners to whom the entire supply
was sold, the price was sometimes raised as high as two
dollars per bushel.<note place='foot'>Cuming, <q>Sketches
of a Tour,</q> 245; Schultz, <q>Travels on an Inland
Voyage,</q> I., 199; Moses, <q>Illinois,</q> I.,
265.</note> The commerce of the West suffered
from a lack of vessels going from New Orleans to Atlantic
ports, and as a result corn sold in New Orleans at fifty
cents per bushel in 1805, while in some of the Atlantic
ports it sold for more than two dollars. At the same time
the West had a good crop, and Kentucky alone could have
spared five hundred thousand bushels of corn, if it could
have been shipped.<note place='foot'><q>Annals of Cong.,</q>
9th Cong., 1st Sess., 1049. Speech by Matthew
Lyon of Kentucky.</note>
</p>

<p>
To secure laborers was difficult. A petition of 1796
said that farm laborers could not be secured for less than
one dollar per day, exclusive of washing, lodging, and
boarding; that every kind of tradesman was paid from
one dollar and a half to two dollars per day, and that at
these prices laborers were scarce. Labor was cheaper on
the Spanish side of the Mississippi, because of the larger
proportion of slaves.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q>
I., 69; <q>Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 448.</note> These wages were doubtless high
in comparison with those paid in the East, just as the one
dollar per day and board paid at the Galena lead mines in
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
1788 was more than double the wages then paid in New
England,<note place='foot'>Ethelbert Stewart, <q>A Few Notes
for an Industrial Hist. of Ill.,</q> in
<q>Pub. No. 8 of the Ill. Hist. Lib.,</q> 120.</note>
but an Illinois price list of 1795 shows that the
wages of 1796 were by no means comparable to those of
today in purchasing power. Making shoes was two dollars
per pair; potatoes were one dollar per bushel; brandy,
one dollar per quart; corn, one dollar per bushel.<note place='foot'><q>Draper
Coll., Ill. MSS.,</q> 73, 74. Original accounts of Wm. Biggs,
high sheriff of the county of St. Clair in the N.-W. Ter.</note>
</p>

<p>
Among the early difficulties in the way of settlement,
one of the most persistent was the presence of prairies.
This is by no means far-fetched, although it sounds so to
modern ears. In 1786, Monroe wrote to Jefferson concerning
the Northwest Territory: <q>A great part of the
territory is miserably poor, especially that near Lakes
Michigan and Erie, and that upon the Mississippi and the
Illinois consists of extensive plains which have not had,
from appearances, and will not have, a single bush on
them for ages. The districts, therefore, within which these
fall will never contain a sufficient number of inhabitants
to entitle them to membership in the confederacy.</q><note place='foot'>Hamilton,
<q>Writings of James Monroe,</q> I., 117.</note>
Some of the most fertile of the Illinois prairies were not
settled until far into the nineteenth century. The false
prophets of the early days will be judged less harshly if
we recall that wood was then a necessity, that no railroads
and few roads existed, that wells now in use in prairie
regions are much deeper than the early settlers could dig,
and that the vast quantities of coal under the surface of
Illinois were undiscovered.
</p>

<p>
As causes for the fact that more than a quarter of a
century after the Revolution, Illinois had a population
estimated at only eleven thousand, may be suggested the
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
presence of hostile Indians; the inability of settlers to
secure a title to their land; the unsettled condition of the
slavery question; the great distance from the older portions
of the United States and from any market; the fact
that Kentucky, Ohio, and Indiana had vast quantities of
unoccupied land more accessible to emigrants than was
Illinois; the danger and the cost of moving; privation
incident to a scanty population, such as lack of roads,
schools, churches and mills; the existence of large prairies
in Illinois. To remove or mitigate these difficulties was
still the problem of Illinois settlers. On some of them a
beginning had been made before 1809, but none were yet
removed.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Illinois During Its Territorial Period. 1809 to 1818.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. The Land and Indian Questions.</head>

<p>
Probably nothing affected settlement in Illinois from
1809 to 1818 more profoundly than did changes in
the land question, for during this period Congress passed
important acts relative to land sales, and this was also the
period of the first sales of public lands in the territory. It
seems strange that such sales should have been so long
delayed, yet the settlement of French claims, although
begun by the Governor of the Northwest Territory at an
early day, and continued by commissioners authorized by
Congress and appointed in 1804, was incomplete when
Illinois became a separate territory, and the United States
government adhered to its policy of selling no land in the
territory until the claims were finally adjudicated. When
a list of decisions reported by the commissioners to Congress
late in 1809 was confirmed in the following May,<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> II., 607.</note> and
the next year a long list of rejected claims arising chiefly
from the work of professional falsifiers, was reported,<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> II., 123.</note> it
seemed probable that the work was nearing completion,
but a final settlement was still delayed, and the long-suffering
Illinois squatters were bitterly disappointed when,
in February, 1812, in accordance with a resolution presented
by the Committee on Public Lands, Congress made
provision for the appointment of a committee to revise the
confirmations made by the Governor years before.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes at
Large,</q> II., 677; <q>Pub. Lands,</q> II., 254-5, 257-8, 210-41.</note> The
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
first legislature of Illinois met in the succeeding November,
and adopted a memorial to Congress in which it was
pointed out that the establishment of a land-office in the
territory, several years before, had led to the opinion that
the public land would soon be sold, and that because of
this opinion those who constituted the majority of the
inhabitants of the territory had been induced to settle,
hoping that they would have an opportunity to purchase
land before they should have made such improvements as
would tempt the competition of avaricious speculators.
The fulfillment of this hope having been long deferred,
many squatters had now made valuable improvements
which they were in danger of losing, either at the public
sales of land or through the designs of the few speculators
who had bought from the needy and unbusinesslike
French most of the unlocated claims. For the relief of
the squatters a law was desired that would permit actual
settlers to enter the land on which their improvements
stood, and requiring persons holding unlocated claims to
locate them on unimproved lands lying in the region
designated by Congress for that purpose. It was also
hoped that as Congress had given one hundred acres of
land to each regular soldier, as much would be granted to
each member of the Illinois militia, since the militiaman
had not only fought as bravely as the regular, but had
also furnished his own supplies. If such a donation was
not made it was hoped that a right of preëmption would
be given to the militia, or failing even this, that they might
be given the right, legally, to collect from anyone entering
their land, the value of their improvements.<note place='foot'><q>Territorial Records
of Ill.,</q> (<q>Pub. of Ill. State Hist. Lib.,</q> No. III.,
109-10).</note> In proof of
the fact stated in the memorial, that speculators had bought
many French claims, it may be noted that William Morrison
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
had ninety-two of the claims granted at Kaskaskia,
his affirmed claims comprising more than eighteen thousand
acres, exclusive of a large number of claims measured in
French units, while John Edgar received a satisfactory
report on claims aggregating more than forty thousand
acres, in addition to a number of claims previously affirmed
to him.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q> II., 157-81, 210-41.</note>
</p>

<p>
A few days after preparing the above memorial, the
legislature prepared an address to Congress, in which
reference was made to the arrangement made between
Congress and Ohio by the Act of April 30, 1802, granting
to Ohio two salt springs on condition that the state should
agree not to tax such public lands as should be sold within
her borders, until after five years from the date of sale.
Illinois wished in similar fashion to gain control of the salt
springs on Saline creek. The Illinois delegate in Congress
was instructed that if the bargain could not be made, he
should attempt to secure an appropriation for opening a
road from Shawneetown to the Saline and thence to Kaskaskia.
It was also desired that the Secretary of the
Treasury should authorize the designation of the college
township reserved by the Ordinance of 1787 and by the
Act of 1804, and because <q>labor in this Territory is abundant,
and laborers at this time extremely scarce,</q> it was
hoped that slaves from Kentucky or elsewhere might be
employed at the salines for a period of not more than
three years, after which they should return to their
masters.<note place='foot'><q>Territorial Records of Ill.,</q>
(<q>Pub. of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.,</q> No.
III., 118-20); <q>Statutes at Large,</q> II., 175; <q>Annals of Cong.</q> (ed. 1853),
12th Cong., III., 883, 1011, 1015.</note>
Each prayer of this address was granted. The
enabling act and the Illinois constitution ceded the salt
springs to the state and agreed that public lands sold in
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
Illinois should be exempt from taxation for five years from
date of sale; the Illinois Constitution provided for the
employment of slaves at the salt works; an act provided
for the location of the college township; and in 1816 the
making of the desired road was authorized, although at
the beginning of 1818 the route had been merely surveyed
and mapped.<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q> 15th Cong.,
1st Sess., III., No. 61, p. 6; Poore, <q>Charters
and Constitutions,</q> Pt. I., 436, 438, 445; <q>Statutes at Large,</q> III., 318.</note>
</p>

<p>
The memorial which preceded the address was also in
large measure successful. An act of February, 1813,
granted to the squatters in Illinois the right of preëmpting
a quarter section, each, of the lands they occupied, and of
entering the land upon the payment of one-twentieth of
the purchase money, as was then required in private
sales.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes at Large,</q> II., 797.</note>
This act was of prime importance. For more than thirty
years settlers in Illinois had improved their lands at the
risk of losing them. Since the appointment, in 1804, of
commissioners to settle the French land claims, the settlers
had been expecting the public lands, including those they
occupied, to be offered for sale; thus it was inevitable that
anxiety concerning the right of preëmption should increase
as the settlement of claims neared completion, and contemporaries
record that the inability to secure land titles
seriously retarded settlement;<note place='foot'>Reynolds,
<q>Illinois&mdash;My Own Times,</q> 156.</note> now, however, the granting
of the right of preëmption, before any public lands in
Illinois were offered for sale, ended the long suspense of
the settlers. Years before this, Kentucky, now selling its
public lands at twenty cents per acre, had passed liberal
preëmption laws, and they were repeatedly renewed,<note place='foot'>Littell,
<q>Laws of Ky.,</q> I., 430; <q>Acts of 1811</q> (Ky.), 213-15; <q>Acts
of 1816</q> (Ky.), 107; <q>Acts of 1817</q> (Ky.), 326.</note> facts
which increased the anxiety of Illinois.
</p>

<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>

<p>
Year after year the settlement of land claims dragged
on, thus delaying the sales of land.<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> III., 2.</note> In an official report
of December, 1813, it is stated that: <q>In the Territory of
Illinois, two land-offices are directed by law to be opened;
one at Kaskaskia, the other at Shawneetown, so soon as the
private claims and donations are all located, and the lands surveyed,
which are in great forwardness.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
II., 873-4.</note> A tract of
land was set apart in April, 1814, to satisfy the claims
recommended by the commissioners for confirmation.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> III., 125.</note> A
report of November, 1815, said that the commissioners
hoped to open the land-office at Kaskaskia on May 15,
1816; and finally, in a report on the public lands sold from
October 1, 1815, to September 30, 1816, we find that about
thirty-four thousand acres have been sold at Shawneetown
and somewhat less than thirteen thousand acres at Kaskaskia,
the price at the latter place being precisely the
two dollars per acre which was then the minimum, while
that at Shawneetown was slightly higher,<note place='foot'><q>State
Papers,</q> II., 14th Cong., 2d Sess., folio. Other volumes of the
same number and session are quarto.</note> presumably due
to the sale of town lots, which had been authorized in
1810, although no sales took place earlier than 1814.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> II., 591; III., 113; <q>Pub. Lands,</q> II., 873-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
The long delay in opening the land-offices in Illinois
was fatal to an early settlement of the region, because the
old states had public lands which they offered for sale at
low rates, thus depriving Illinois of a fair chance as a
competitor. In 1779 Kentucky granted to each family
which had settled before January 1, 1778, the right of
preëmption&mdash;four hundred acres if no improvement had
been made and one thousand acres if a hut had been
built. The preëmptor, by a law of 1786, was to pay 13<hi rend='italic'>s</hi>.
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
4<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> per one hundred acres.<note place='foot'>Littell,
<q>Laws of Ky.,</q> I., 395-7, 456.</note> In 1781 the sheriffs of Lincoln,
Fayette, and Jefferson counties, Virginia, were authorized to
survey not more than four hundred acres for each poor
family in Kentucky, for which twenty shillings per one
hundred acres should be paid within two and one-half
years.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I.,
430.</note> In 1791 more than three and one-half millions of
acres were sold in New York at eight pence per acre, while
many thousands of acres in addition were sold for less
than four shillings per acre&mdash;many for less than two
shillings.<note place='foot'>O'Callaghan, <q>Doc. Hist. of N. Y.,</q> III., 1069-83,
quarto; 649-57, folio.</note> Pennsylvania offered homestead claims, in 1792,
at seven pounds ten shillings per hundred acres.<note place='foot'>Agnew,
<q>Settlement and Land Titles of N.-W. Pa.,</q> 118-19. See
also <q>Jour. of H. of R.</q> (Pa.), 1792-1794, first page of second appendix to
record of 1st Sess. of 3d House; <hi rend='italic'>ibid</hi>.,
first page of second appendix to record
of 1st Sess. of 4th House; Sergeant, <q>View of the Land Laws of Pa., with
Notices of Its Early Hist. and Legislation,</q> <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
In December, 1796, Kentucky sheriffs were ordered to
sell no more land for taxes until directed by the legislature
to do so.<note place='foot'>Littell, <q>Laws of Ky.,</q> I.,
516.</note> In 1800, and again in 1812, Kentucky offered
land at twenty cents per acre, and in 1820 at fifteen cents
per acre,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II.,
420-2; <q>Acts of 1811</q> (Ky.), 213-15; <q>Acts of 1817</q> (Ky.),
554; <q>Acts of 1819</q> (Ky.), 832.</note> while during the interval preëmption acts were
repeatedly passed.<note place='foot'><q>Acts of 1816</q> (Ky.),
107; <q>Acts of 1817</q> (Ky.), 326.</note> Land in Tennessee sold at from twelve
and one-half to twenty-five cents per acre in 1814, and in
1819 at fifty cents.<note place='foot'>Phelan, <q>Hist. of
Tenn.,</q> 303. Quoted from Jones, <q>The Chickasaw
Country Lately Ceded to the U. S.</q> (1819).</note>
</p>

<p>
In 1816 various classes of claimants were given increased
facilities and an extension of time for locating their claims
in Illinois. The business of satisfying claims was to linger
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
for years, but with the opening of the land-offices it ceased
to be a potent factor in retarding settlement.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> III., 307; <q>Pub. Lands,</q> II., 741; III., 1-5,
384-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
One writer says of Illinois: <q>The public lands have
rarely sold for more than five dollars per acre, <emph>at auction</emph>.
Those sold at Edwardsville in October, 1816, averaged
four dollars. Private sales at the land-office are fixed by
law, at two dollars per acre. The old French locations
command various prices, from one to fifty dollars. Titles
derived from the United States government are always
valid, and those from individuals rarely false.</q><note place='foot'>Brown,
<q>Western Gazetteer, or Emigrants' Directory</q> (1817), 33.</note> At this
time emigrants were going in large numbers to Missouri,
and the Illinois river country, not yet relieved of its Indian
title, was being explored.<note place='foot'>White,
<q>Descendants of John Walker,</q> 458-9, 461.</note>
</p>

<p>
Reports concerning the sales of public lands give the
quantity of land sold in Illinois toward the close of the
territorial period, the figures for 1817 and 1818 being as
follows:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{1cm} p{1cm} p{1.1cm} p{1.1cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(15) r r r r'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Acres in 1817.</cell><cell>Acres in 1818.</cell>
     <cell>Jan. 1, 1818.</cell><cell>Sept. 30, 1818.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Shawneetown</cell><cell>72,384</cell><cell>216,315</cell>
     <cell>$291,429</cell><cell>$637,468</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kaskaskia</cell><cell>90,493</cell><cell>121,052</cell>
     <cell>209,295</cell><cell>406,288</cell></row>
<row><cell>Edwardsville<note place='foot'>A land-office was
established at Edwardsville by an act of Apr. 29, 1816.</note></cell>
     <cell>149,165</cell><cell>121,923</cell><cell>301,701</cell>
     <cell>451,499<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q> No. 52,
15th Cong., 2d Sess., IV. Hundredths of acres
and cents are omitted from the tables. The figures for Shawneetown cover
the periods from Jan. 1 to Sept. 30; those for the other offices, from Jan. 1
to Aug. 31.</note></cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>312,042</cell><cell>459,290</cell><cell>$802,425</cell>
     <cell>$1,495,255</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The percentage of debt showed a marked increase in the
first nine months of 1818. There were received in three-quarters
of 1817 and 1818, respectively:
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.4cm} p{1cm} p{1cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(15) r r'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>1817.</cell><cell>1818.</cell></row>
<row><cell>At Shawneetown</cell><cell>$32,837</cell><cell>$112,759</cell></row>
<row><cell>At Kaskaskia</cell><cell>41,218</cell><cell>68,975</cell></row>
<row><cell>At Edwardsville</cell><cell>41,426</cell><cell>78,788</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
During this same period the receipts at Steubenville,
Marietta, and Wooster, Ohio, decreased,<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> III., 405.</note> showing that
Illinois was beginning to surpass Ohio as an objective
point for emigrants wishing to enter land.
</p>

<p>
The Indian question was interwoven with the land
question during the territorial period. In 1809 the Indians
relinquished their claim to some small tracts of land lying
near the point where the Wabash ceases to be a state
boundary line.<note place='foot'><q>Indian Aff.,</q> I., 761-2;
<q>18th An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q>
Pt. 2, 678; Nos. 73, 74. Plate CXXIV. See map of
Indian cessions.</note> No more cessions were made until after
the war of 1812. Although the population of Illinois
increased, during the territorial period, from some eleven
thousand to about forty thousand, the increase before the
war was slight, and thus it came about that during the war
the few whites were kept busy defending themselves from
the large and hostile Indian population. So well does the
manner of defence in Illinois illustrate the frontier character
of the region that a sketch of the same may be given.
When, in 1811, the Indians became hostile and murdered a
few whites, the condition of the settlers was precarious in
the extreme. Today the term city would be almost a favor
to a place containing no more inhabitants than were then to
be found in the white settlements in Illinois. Moreover,
few as were the whites, they were dispersed in a long half-oval
extending from a point on the Mississippi near the
present Alton southward to the Ohio, and thence up that
river and the Wabash to a point considerably north of
Vincennes. This fringe of settlement was but a few miles
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
wide in some places, while so sparse was the population
near the mouth of the Ohio that the communication
between northern and southern Indians was unchecked.
Carlyle was regarded as the extreme eastern boundary of
settlements to the westward; a fort on Muddy River, near
where the old Fort Massac trace crossed the stream, was
considered as one of the most exposed situations; and
Fort La Motte, on a creek of the same name above Vincennes,
was a far northern point. The exposed outside
was some hundreds of miles long, and the interior and
north were occupied by ten times as many hostile savages
as there were whites in the country, the savages being given
counsel and ammunition by the British garrisons on the
north.<note place='foot'>Reynolds, <q>Illinois&mdash;My Own
Times,</q> 81-4.</note> Under conditions then existing, aid from the United
States could be expected only in the event of dire necessity.
Stout frontiersmen were almost ready to seek refuge in
flight, but no general exodus took place, although in February,
1812, Governor Edwards wrote to the Secretary of
War: <q>The alarms and apprehensions of the people are
becoming so universal, that really I should not be surprised
if we should, in three months, lose more than one-half
of our present population. In places, in my opinion,
entirely out of danger, many are removing. In other
parts, large settlements are about to be totally deserted.
Even in my own neighborhood, several families have
removed, and others are preparing to do so in a week or
two. A few days past, a gentleman of respectability arrived
here from Kentucky, and he informed me that he saw on
the road, in one day, upwards of twenty wagons conveying
families out of this Territory. Every effort to check the
prevalence of such terror seems to be ineffectual, and
although much of it is unreasonably indulged, yet it is very
certain the Territory will very shortly be in considerable
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
danger. Its physical force is very inconsiderable, and is
growing weaker, while it presents numerous points of
attack.</q><note place='foot'>Edwards, <q>Hist. of Ill. and
Life of Ninian Edwards,</q> 301.</note>
</p>

<p>
To the first feeling of fear succeeded a determination to
hold the ground. Before the middle of 1812, Governor
Edwards had established Fort Russell, a few miles northwest
of the present Edwardsville, bringing to this place,
which was to be his headquarters, the cannon which Louis
XIV. had had placed in Fort Chartres;<note place='foot'>Reynolds,
<q>Illinois&mdash;My Own Times,</q> 82.</note> and two volunteer
companies had been raised, and had <q>ranged to a great
distance&mdash;principally between the Illinois and the Kaskaskia
rivers, and sometimes between the Kaskaskia and
the Wabash&mdash;always keeping their line of march never
less than one and sometimes three days' journey outside
of all the settlements</q><note place='foot'>Edwards, <q>Hist. of
Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards,</q> 329.</note>&mdash;which incidentally shows what
great unoccupied regions still existed even in the southern
part of Illinois. As the rangers furnished their own supplies,
the two companies went out alternately for periods of
fifteen days. Sometimes the company on duty divided,
one part marching in one direction and the other in the
opposite, in order to produce the greatest possible effect
upon the Indians. Settlers on the frontier&mdash;and that
comprised a large proportion of the population&mdash;<q>forted
themselves,</q> as it was then expressed. Where a few
families lived near each other, one of the most substantial
houses was fortified, and here the community staid at
night, and in case of imminent danger in the daytime as
well. Isolated outlying families left their homes and
retired to the nearest fort. Such places of refuge were
numerous and many were the attacks which they successfully
withstood.
</p>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<p>
Rangers and frontier forts were used with much effect,
but the great dispersion of settlement and the large numbers
of Indians combined to make it wholly impossible to
make such means of defence entirely adequate. In August,
1812, the Governor wrote to the Secretary of War: <q>The
principal settlements of this Territory being on the Mississippi,
are at least one hundred and fifty miles from those
of Indiana, and immense prairies intervene between them.
There can, therefore, be no concert of operations for the
protection of their frontiers and ours.... No troops
of any kind have yet arrived in this Territory, and I think
you may count on hearing of a bloody stroke upon us very
soon. I have been extremely reluctant to send my family
away, but, unless I hear shortly of more assistance than a
few rangers, I shall bury my papers in the ground, send
my family off, and stand my ground as long as possible.</q><note place='foot'>Edwards,
<q>Hist. of Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards,</q> 335.</note>
The <q>bloody stroke</q> predicted by the Governor fell on the
garrison at Fort Dearborn, where Chicago now stands.
Some regular troops were subsequently sent to the territory,
but the war did not lose its frontier character. One
of the most characteristic features was that troops sometimes
set out on a campaign of considerable length, in an
uninhabited region, without any baggage train and practically
without pack horses, the men carrying their provisions
on their horses, and the horses living on wild grass.<note place='foot'>Reynolds,
<q>Illinois&mdash;My Own Times,</q> 86-7.</note>
Unflagging energy was shown by the settlers, several
effective campaigns being carried on, and by the close of
1814 the war was closed in Illinois.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
102.</note>
</p>

<p>
Extinction of Indian titles to land was retarded by the
war and also by the policy of the United States, which was
expressed by Secretary of War Crawford, in 1816, as follows:
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
<q>The determination to purchase land only when
demanded for settlement will form the settled policy of
the Government. Experience has sufficiently proven that
our population will spread over any cession, however
extensive, before it can be brought into market, and before
there is any regular and steady demand for settlement,
thereby increasing the difficulty of protection, embarrassing
the Government by broils with the natives, and
rendering the execution of the laws regulating intercourse
with the Indian tribes utterly impracticable.</q><note place='foot'><q>Indian
Aff.,</q> II., 99.</note> Some
progress, however, was made in extinguishing Indian titles
during the territorial period after the close of the war.
In 1816, several tribes confirmed the cession of 1804 of
land lying south of an east and west line passing through
the southern point of Lake Michigan, and ceded a route
for an Illinois-Michigan canal.<note place='foot'><q>Indian Aff.,</q>
II., 95-6; <q>18th An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q>
Pt. 2, 680-3, No. 77, Plate CXXV., and No. 78, Plate CXXIV. See map
of Indian cessions.</note> At Edwardsville, on September
25, 1818, the Peoria, Kaskaskia, Michigamia, Cahokia,
and Tamarois ceded a tract comprising most of
southern and much of central Illinois.<note place='foot'><q>Indian
Aff.,</q> II., 167; <q>18th An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q>
Pt. 2, 692-3; No. 96a, Plate CXXIV. See also No. 48 on the same plate,
and No. 77, Plate CXXV. See map of Indian cessions.</note> The significance
of this cession would have been immense had it not been
that it was made by weak tribes, while the powerful
Kickapoo still claimed and held all that part of the ceded
tract lying north of the parallel of 39°&mdash;a little to the
north of the mouth of the Illinois river. This Kickapoo
claim included the fertile and already famous Sangamon
country, in which the state capital was eventually to be
located, and squatters were pressing hard upon the Indian
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
frontier, yet the Indians still held the land when Illinois
became a state.
</p>

<p>
During the territorial period, Illinois gained the long-sought
right of preëmption; the French claims ceased to
retard settlement; some progress was made in the extinction
of Indian titles, and the sale of public land was
begun. The new state was to find the Indian question a
pressing one, and some changes in the land system were
yet desired, but the crucial point was passed.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Territorial Government of Illinois. 1809 to 1818.</head>

<p>
The act for the division of Indiana Territory provided
that Illinois, during the first stage of its territorial existence,
should have a government similar to that of the
Northwest Territory under the Ordinance of 1787. In
1809 there were in Illinois two distinct and hostile parties,
which had been formed on questions arising in Indiana
Territory before division. It was with sound judgment,
therefore, that the President, going outside of Illinois,
appointed as Governor, Ninian Edwards of Kentucky, a
native of Maryland, who successfully resisted all efforts to
involve him in party quarrels.<note place='foot'><q>Territorial Records
of Ill.,</q> (<q>Pub. of the Ill. Hist. Lib.,</q> No. III., 3,
6, 7).</note>
</p>

<p>
Laws for the government of the territory were to be
chosen by the Governor and the judges from the laws of
the states. The judges were Jesse B. Thomas and William
Sprigg, natives of Maryland, and Alexander Stuart, a
native of Virginia. It is worthy of note that of the twelve
laws chosen before the meeting of the first territorial
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
legislature, five were from Kentucky, three from Georgia,
two from Virginia, one from South Carolina, and one from
Pennsylvania.<note place='foot'><q>Territorial Records of
Ill.</q> (<q>Pub. of the Ill. Hist. Lib.,</q> No. III.,
10-19). Of the thirty-eight laws selected by the Governor and judges in the
Northwest Territory, three were from the codes of southern states; of the
fifteen so selected in Indiana Territory, thirteen were from southern codes&mdash;<q>Ind.
Hist. Soc. Pamphlets,</q> No. I., 16; contained in Vol. 2 of <q>Publications.</q>
Illinois was thus most southern of the three.</note> A people practically southern in
origin was being governed by officials from the south under
southern laws.
</p>

<p>
Illinois entered the second grade of territorial government
in 1812, electing its first legislature in October.<note place='foot'><q>Territorial
Records of Ill.</q> (<q>Pub. of the Ill. Hist. Lib.,</q> No. III., 23,
26-7).</note> In
the preceding May, Congress had passed an act making
radical and most important extensions in the suffrage in
Illinois, over that which had been prescribed by the Ordinance
of 1787. The new provision was: <q>Every free white
male person who shall have attained the age of twenty-one
years, and who shall have paid a county or territorial
tax, and who shall have resided one year in said Territory
previous to any general election, and be at the time of
any such election a resident thereof, shall be entitled to
vote for members of the Legislative Council and House of
Representatives of the said Territory.</q> Each county was
to elect one member of the Legislative Council, to serve
for four years. The territorial delegate to Congress was
also made elective by the citizens.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> II., 741-2.</note> One has but to consider
what a complete revolution this act brought about to
appreciate its great significance. Previously the Legislative
Council had been appointive by the President of the
United States, from nominees of the territorial House of
Representatives, the nominees being twice the number
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
necessary; the delegate to Congress had not been chosen
by popular vote; and a freehold qualification for the
elective franchise had obtained. Early petitions show how
much the people complained of a landed aristocracy,<note place='foot'><q>Ind.
Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 461-70.</note> and
letters written by Governor Edwards early in 1812 show how
well founded was the complaint. No preëmption act had
yet been passed, and of the more than twelve thousand
inhabitants of Illinois some two hundred and twenty possessed
a freehold of fifty acres, thus giving the balance of
power, if the territory should enter the second grade under
the old provision, to one hundred and eleven persons. Nearly
one-third of the entire population lived either near the
Ohio or between it and the Kaskaskia, and among them
there were not more than three or four freeholders, and not
one who possessed two hundred acres&mdash;the necessary
qualification for a representative. With no public lands
yet offered for sale, with no right of preëmption, with a
freehold qualification for the suffrage, this law enfranchising
squatters was of prime importance.<note place='foot'>Edwards, <q>Hist. of
Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards.</q> 296, 306.</note>
</p>

<p>
The first legislature had few French members, and was
apparently southern in nativity.<note place='foot'><p><q>Territorial
Records of Ill.</q> (<q>Pub. of Ill. Hist. Lib.,</q> No. III., 62, 86).
</p>
<p>
(For each of the following officials, their Nativity and County are listed.)
</p>
<p>
Legislative Council.
</p>
<p>
Pierre Menard, Canada, Randolph.<lb/>
Wm. Biggs, Md. St. Clair.<lb/>
Sam'l Judy, Swiss or Md., Madison.<lb/>
Thos. Ferguson, Johnson.<lb/>
Benjamin Talbott, Gallatin.
</p>
<p>
House of Reps.
</p>
<p>
Dr. George Fisher, Va., Randolph.<lb/>
Rev. Joshua Oglesby, St. Clair.<lb/>
Jacob Short, St. Clair.<lb/>
Rev. Wm. Jones, N. C., Madison.<lb/>
Philip Trammell, Gallatin.<lb/>
Alex. Wilson, Va., Gallatin.<lb/>
John Grammar, Johnson.
</p>
<p>
Territorial Judges.
</p>
<p>
Jesse B. Thomas, Maryland.<lb/>
Alexander Stuart, Virginia.<lb/>
William Sprigg, Maryland.
</p>
<p>
Territorial Secretaries.
</p>
<p>
Nathaniel Pope, Kentucky.<lb/>
Joseph Philips, Tennessee.
</p>
<p>
Delegates in Congress and Term.
</p>
<p>
Shadrach Bond, Md, Dec. 3, 1812-14.<lb/>
Benj. Stephenson, Ky, Nov. 14, 1814-16.<lb/>
Nathan'l Pope, Ky, Dec. 2, 1816-18.
</p>
<p>
Governor.
</p>
<p>
Ninian Edwards, Md., 1809-1818.
</p>
<p>
Officers other than members are added to the above in order to emphasize
the southern origin of Illinois territorial officials. New England was not yet
a factor in Illinois politics.</p></note> After more than three
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
years and a half of legislation by the Governor and judges,
the inhabitants at last had an elective legislature. The
journals of the two houses indicate that the belief that
had been expressed in petitions to Congress some years
before that such a body would provide an efficient government,
was well founded. The laws passed were eminently
practical for the frontier conditions under which they were
to operate.<note place='foot'><q>Territorial Records of
Illinois</q> (<q>Pub. of the Ill. Hist. Lib.,</q> No. III.,
62-170).</note> A man contemplating settlement in Illinois
could now be sure that he would be governed by Illinois
men whom he had a share in electing.
</p>

<p>
The rude character of the facilities for transportation is
indicated by the fact that the earlier laws of the territory
deal with ferries only rarely and with bridges not at all,
while as time progresses and population increases, ferries
multiply and bridges begin to be constructed. By 1817-18
the desire for banks and for internal improvements, which
was to be disastrous to the state at a later period, began
to show itself. As examples, the Bank of Cairo and the
Illinois Navigation Company will suffice. Nine men purchased
the low peninsula lying near the junction of the
Ohio and the Mississippi, and were incorporated by <q>An
Act to Incorporate the City and Bank of Cairo.</q> A site
for a city comprising at least two thousand lots, with
streets eighty feet wide, was to be laid out. The lots
were to be sold at one hundred and fifty dollars each and
were to be not less than one hundred and twenty by sixty-six
feet in size. Of the purchase money, two-thirds
should go into the stock of the Bank of Cairo, and one-third
to a fund to build dykes to keep the city from being
flooded.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of Ill. Ter., 1817-18,</q> pp. 72-82;
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1815-16, p. 44.</note> Considering the time and the
location, the scheme was utterly impracticable. <q>An Act to Incorporate
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
the Stockholders of the Illinois Navigation Company</q>
authorized the formation of a company with a
capital of one hundred thousand dollars, for the purpose
of cutting a canal through the peninsula between the Ohio
and the Mississippi. Within twelve years a canal sufficiently
large for the passage of a vessel of twenty tons
burden should be completed. The company was given
the right of eminent domain.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of
Ill. Ter., 1817-18,</q> pp. 57-64.</note> Here again the character
of the project was unsuited to existing conditions. Population
was increasing rapidly at the time these laws were
passed, but they required for their success an increase
much more rapid. They were, however, pleasing to the
settlers and the prospective settlers of the day.
</p>

<p>
On January 16, 1818, Mr. Pope, of Illinois, was appointed
chairman of a select committee to consider a petition
from the Illinois legislature praying for a state government.
One week later the committee reported a bill to
enable Illinois to form such a government, and to admit
the state into the union. When the enabling act came up
for discussion, Mr. Pope offered the amendment which
changed the northern boundary of Illinois from a line due
west from the southern extremity of Lake Michigan, as
provided by the Ordinance of 1787, to a line running from
that lake to the Mississippi on the parallel of 42° 30'.
<q>The object of this amendment, Mr. Pope said, was to
gain, for the proposed state, a coast on Lake Michigan.
This would offer additional security to the perpetuity of
the union, inasmuch as the state would thereby be connected
with the states of Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and
New York, through the lakes. The facility of opening a
canal between Lake Michigan and the Illinois River, said
Mr. Pope, is acknowledged by every one who has visited
the place. Giving to the proposed state the port of Chicago
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
(embraced in the proposed limits), will draw its attention
to the opening of the communication between the Illinois
River and that place, and the improvement of that harbor.
It was believed, he said, upon good authority, that the line
of separation between Indiana and Illinois would strike
Lake Michigan south of Chicago, and not pass west of it,
as had been supposed by some geographers....</q>
Although an avowed violation of the Ordinance of 1787,
the amendment was adopted without division or recorded
debate. Mr. Pope also secured an amendment to the
effect that the state's proportion of the proceeds of the
sales of public lands, instead of being applied to the
making of roads and canals in the state, should be used
in making roads leading to the state, and for the encouragement
of learning, two-fifths being applied to the
former purpose. Pope pointed out that people would
build roads as they needed them, much more readily than
they would supply schools, and that waste school lands in
a new country would produce slight revenue. Subsequent
history of the state justified both statements. The enabling
act met with little opposition and was signed by President
Monroe on April 18, 1818.<note place='foot'><q>Annals of Cong.,</q>
15th Cong., 1st Sess., 1677, 1738; <q>H. J.,</q> 15th
Cong., 1st Sess., 151, 174; Benton, <q>Abridgment of Debates in Cong.,</q> VI.,
173; <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> XI., 494-501.</note>
</p>

<p>
One of the provisions of the enabling act was that, in
order to become a state, Illinois must have as many as
forty thousand inhabitants. In anticipation of such a
provision, the territorial legislature had passed a law in
January, 1818, providing that a census of the territory
should be taken between April 1 and June 1. A supplemental
act provided that as a great increase in population
might be expected between June 1 and December, census
takers should continue to take the census in their districts
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
of all who should remove into them between June 1 and
December 1. The law as framed gave an opportunity
to count not only immigrants, but to re-count all who
moved from one county to another (such moving being
common), and to count in each successive county persons
passing through the state. There is no reasonable doubt
that at the time the census was taken, the territory had
fewer than forty thousand inhabitants. Dana gives a
census of 1818, in which the number is given as thirty-four
thousand six hundred and sixty-six, and adds:
<q>Another enumeration having been taken a few months
after, the amount of population returned was forty thousand
one hundred and fifty-six, which exceeded the
number entitling the territory to become a state.</q><note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> III., 428; <q>Laws of Ill. Ter.,</q> 1817-18. pp. 42-5;
Dana, <q>Sketches of Western Country,</q> 1819, 153; <q>Niles' Register,</q> XIV.,
359 (July 18, 1818); Babcock, <q>Memoir of John Mason Peck,</q> 99.</note>
</p>

<p>
In August, 1818, the Constitution of Illinois was completed.
Its provisions most likely to influence settlement
were those concerning the elective franchise and slavery.
It provided that <q>In all elections, all white male inhabitants
above the age of twenty-one years, having resided in the
state six months next preceding the election, shall enjoy
the right of an elector; but no person shall be entitled to
vote except in the county or district in which he shall
actually reside at the time of the election.</q> Slaves could
not hereafter be brought into the state, but existing slavery
was not abolished, and existing indentures&mdash;and some
were for ninety-nine years&mdash;should be carried out, although
future indentures should not run for a longer term than
one year. Male children of slaves or indentured servants
should be free at the age of twenty-one, and females at
eighteen. Slaves from other states could be employed only
at the Saline Creek salt works, and there only until 1825.<note place='foot'>Poore,
<q>Charters and Constitutions,</q> Pt. I., 442, 445. Of the members
of the Constitutional Convention of Illinois whose nativity has been learned,
ten were natives of the South, two were natives of Illinois born of southern
parents, two were Irishmen from the South, and five were natives of the
North. New England was represented by one man, John Messinger, a son-in-law
of Matthew Lyon.</note>
</p>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>

<p>
During the congressional debate on the acceptance of the
Illinois Constitution, objection to admitting the state was
made on the ground that the number of inhabitants was
doubtful, and that slavery was not distinctly prohibited,
Tallmadge, of New York, who later wished to restrict
slavery in Missouri, being the chief objector. The state
was admitted, however, and on December 4, 1818, the representatives
and senators from Illinois took their seats in
Congress.<note place='foot'><q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 15th Cong.,
2d Sess., 38, 305-11; <q>Statutes at
Large,</q> III., 536.</note>
</p>

<p>
Between 1809 and 1818, Illinois passed from a non-representative
territorial government to a liberal state
government. The energy of the settlers had done much
to hasten the change, and the change, in turn, did much
to hasten settlement.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Transportation and Settlement, 1809 to 1818.</head>

<p>
At the close of the War of 1812, an unparalleled emigration
to the frontiers of the United States began. Contemporary
accounts speak of its great volume. <q>Through
New York and down the Alleghany River is now the track
of many emigrants from the east to the west. Two
hundred and sixty waggons have passed a certain house
on this route in nine days, besides many persons on
horseback and on foot. The editor of the Gennessee
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
Farmer observes, that he himself met on the road to
Hamilton a cavalcade of upwards of twenty waggons,
containing one company of one hundred and sixteen
persons, on their way to <hi rend='italic'>Indiana</hi>, and all from one town in
the district of Maine. So great is the emigration to
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Missouri</hi> also, that it is
apprehended that many must suffer for want of provisions the ensuing
winter.</q><note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q> XIII.,
1817, 224.</note> <q>Nothing more strongly proves the superiority
of the western territory than the vast emigration to it
from the eastern and southern states; during the eighteen
months previous to April, 1816, fifteen thousand waggons
passed over the bridge at Cayuga, containing emigrants to
the western country.</q><note place='foot'>Kingdom, <q>America
and the British Colonies,</q> 1816, 17.</note> <q>Old America seems to be breaking
up, and moving westward.... The number of
emigrants who passed this way [St. Clairsville, Ohio], was
greater last year than in any preceding; and the present
spring they are still more numerous than the last. Fourteen
waggons yesterday, and thirteen today, have gone through
this town. Myriads take their course down the Ohio. The
waggons swarm with children. I heard today of three together,
which contain forty-two of these young citizens.</q><note place='foot'>Birkbeck,
<q>Journey from Va. to Ill.,</q> 1817, 25, 29.</note>
From Hamilton, New York: <q>It is estimated, that there
are now in this village and its vicinity, three hundred
families, besides single travellers, amounting in all to fifteen
hundred souls, waiting for a rise of water to embark for
<q>the promised land.</q></q><note place='foot'>Wright, <q>Letters from the West, or,
A Caution to Emigrants,</q> 1818, 1.</note> <q>The numerous companies of emigrants
that flock to this country, might appear, to those
who have not witnessed them, almost incredible. But
there is scarce a day, except when the river is impeded
with ice, but what there is a greater or less number of
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
boats to be seen floating down its gentle current, to some
place of destination. No less than five hundred families
stopped at Cincinnati at one time, and many of them
having come a great distance, and being of the poorer class
of people, before they could provide for themselves, were
in a suffering condition; but to the honor of the citizens of Cincinnati,
they raised a donation and relieved their distress.</q><note place='foot'>Harding,
<q>Tour through the Western Country,</q> 1818-19, 5.</note>
Of the remote districts, Missouri and Michigan
were receiving crowds of immigrants.<note place='foot'><q>Am. Mag. and
Review,</q> III., 1818, 152; I., 1817, 473.</note>
</p>

<p>
The changes in government and in the land question in
Illinois were typical of changes in other frontier regions,
but although worthy of note as helping to make a more
attractive place for settlement, they are by no means
sufficient to account for the great migration to the westward.
Why that migration took place and how it was
accomplished are interesting and important questions.
</p>

<p>
Emigration from New England resulted largely from
financial and industrial disorganization caused by the close
of the war, and a year of such continued cold weather as
to produce a famine. This movement was interesting,
dramatic, and large in volume, but its influence upon
Illinois was slight, because the tide was stayed to the eastward
of that state.<note place='foot'>Goodrich, <q>Recollections of a
Life Time,</q> II., 78 ff.; Birkbeck, <q>Journey
from Va. to Ill.,</q> 1817, 25; <q>Va. Patriot,</q> Sept. 7, 21, 1816; Varney,
<q>A Brief Hist. of Me.,</q> 239; Abbott, <q>Hist. of Me.,</q> 424; Williamson,
<q>Hist. of Me.,</q> II., 664-6; Sanborn, <q>Hist. of N. H.,</q> 265; Whiton,
<q>Hist. of N. H.,</q> 188; Barstow, <q>Hist. of N. H.,</q> 392; Thompson,
<q>Hist. of the State of Vt.,</q> 1833, 222; same, 1853, Pt. I., 20; Hoskins, <q>Hist.
of the State of Vt.,</q> 232; Wilbur, <q>Early Hist. of Vt.,</q> III., 162-3; Heaton,
<q>Story of Vt.,</q> 136; Beckley, <q>Hist. of Vt.,</q> 171-2; <q>Gov. and
Council-Vt.,</q> VI., 429-31.</note> Migration from the South was also
large, and it was from this source that most of the immigrants
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
to Illinois came. In 1816 there was a severe drought
in eastern North Carolina, and many planters cut their
immature corn for their cattle, while great numbers sold
their property and joined the emigrants.<note place='foot'><q>Va.
Patriot,</q> Sept. 11, 1816.</note> Kentucky, still
a favorite place for settlement, was in the midst of a land
boom which reached such proportions as to cause a large
volume of emigration to Illinois, Missouri, and the southwest.
The buyer of Kentucky land was often a neighbor
who wished to enlarge his farm and work on a larger
scale, or some well-to-do immigrant who preferred the
location to a more remote region. Land sold on credit
and at fictitious prices, the seller in turn buying land for
which he frequently could make only the first payment.
Retribution did not come, however, until after 1820, and
for some years it seemed as if Kentucky was to become a
source of population, for it was to Illinois and Missouri,
and to a lesser degree to Alabama, what New England
was to Ohio.<note place='foot'>White, <q>Descendants of
John Walker,</q> 425, 453, 461.</note> Probably chief among the reasons for
migration from the South was the increase of slavery, with
the resulting changes in industrial and social conditions.
Early in the century the growing importance of the cotton
crop began to hasten a stratification of opinion which
was determined by physiographic areas. The western
parts of Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina, the
northern part of Georgia, and the eastern parts of Kentucky
and Tennessee, respectively, being hilly and less fertile
than the coastal plain, became the center of the southern
anti-slavery sentiment. On the plain settled the wealthy
planters, and later the poorer Germans and Quakers settled
in the uplands. Only when cotton-raising became very
profitable was slavery to intrude upon the latter location.<note place='foot'>Bassett,
<q>Anti-Slavery Leaders of N. C.</q> (J. H. U. Studies, XVI., 267-71).</note>
</p>

<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>

<p>
During the war the production of cotton in the United
States had been almost constant in amount and less than
in preceding years, but 1815 saw an increase of over forty-two
per cent and 1816 an increase of twenty-four per
cent,<note place='foot'><p>De Bow, <q>Industrial Resources of
the U. S.,</q> I., 122-3. Millions of
pounds of cotton raised in the U. S.:
</p>
<p>
1808,  75.<lb/>
1809,  82.<lb/>
1810,  85.<lb/>
1811,  80.<lb/>
1812,  75.<lb/>
1813,  75.<lb/>
1814,  70.<lb/>
1815, 100.<lb/>
1816, 124.<lb/>
1817, 130.<lb/>
1818, 125.<lb/>
1819, 167.<lb/>
1820, 160.<lb/>
1821, 180.<lb/>
1822, 210.<lb/>
In Ga. 1811, 20, 1821, 45.<lb/>
In Tenn. 1811,  3., 1821, 20.</p></note> while in the latter year South Carolina, after an
interval of thirteen years, resumed its slavery legislation
by passing the first of a series of acts which show that the
slavery problem was becoming increasingly difficult. Similar
legislation took place in Tennessee, and to a lesser
degree in Kentucky.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes at
Large,</q> S. C., VII., 451-66; <q>Laws of Tenn., revision
of 1831,</q> I., 314-30; <q>Acts of 1818,</q> Ky., 623, 787; <q>Acts of 1815,</q> Ky.,
Feb. 8, 1815.</note> Increased production of cotton was
accompanied by an increase in price, middling upland
cotton selling at New York at 15 cents per pound in 1814,
at 21 cents in 1815, at 29-½ cents in 1816, at 26-½ cents in
1817, and at 34 cents in 1818, while South Carolina sea-island
cotton sold at Charleston in 1816 at 55 cents a
pound.<note place='foot'>J. L. Watkins, in <q>U. S. Dept. of Agric., Div. of Statistics,
Misc. Ser., Bulletin No. 9,</q> p. 8.</note> An increase in cotton production meant an
increase of the plantation system with its slaves, this meant an
increased demand for large farms, and also a strengthening
of the antagonism between pro-slavery and anti-slavery
parties. Even in 1812, a man who wished to sell, lease, or
rent his manufacturing establishment in the northwestern
part of Virginia, Frederick county, lamented in his advertisement
that <q>some good men of strict moral or religious
principles should object against forming settled abodes in
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
Virginia</q> or other slave states.<note place='foot'><q>National
Intelligencer,</q> Washington, D. C., Apr. 18, 1812.</note> Census reports show that
the proportion of negroes to whites increased in the
western counties of North Carolina during the decade
1810 to 1820 over the proportion in 1800 to 1810. Conditions
above described naturally led to the emigration of
at least four classes of people: those who were anti-slavery,
those who did not wish to change from small
farming to the plantation system, the poor whites who
found themselves increasingly disgraced and who at the
same time found that their land was in demand, the slave-holder
who wished a large tract of virgin soil. It is very
important to note that these forces were merely beginning
to operate in the time from 1814 to 1818, and that they
did not reach their maximum of influence until after 1830,
yet as the population of Illinois increased less than twenty-eight
thousand from 1810 to 1818, it is altogether probable
that a considerable proportion were influenced by the
causes suggested. It is also true that some pioneers
moved merely from habit, without any well-defined cause.
</p>

<p>
Although it is true that the first steamboat that passed
down the Ohio and Mississippi made its trip in the winter
of 1811-12, and by 1816 an enterprising captain had made
a successful experiment of running a steamboat with coal for
fuel, also that the speed of steamboats in eastern waters was
a matter for enthusiastic comment, yet it is also true that
immigrants to Illinois did not usually arrive by steamer.<note place='foot'><q>Rambler
in N. A.,</q> I., 104-11; <q>Am. Register,</q> II., 1817, 202-3.</note>
The development of steamboat navigation in western
waters was slow, the first steamboat reaching St. Louis on
August 2, 1817.<note place='foot'><q>Memoir of John Mason
Peck,</q> 81.</note> Peter Cartwright wrote of his trip from
the West to the General Conference in Baltimore, in 1816:
<q>We had no steamboats, railroad cars, or comfortable
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
stages in those days. We had to travel from the extreme
West on horseback. It generally took us near a month to
go; a month was spent at General Conference, and nearly
a month in returning to our fields of labor.</q><note place='foot'><q>Autobiography
of Peter Cartwright,</q> 156.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some instances of the manner and cost of emigration
may be given. A man with his wife and brother having
arrived at Philadelphia from England, <hi rend='italic'>en route</hi> to Birkbeck's
settlement<note place='foot'>Morris Birkbeck and George Flower,
from England, founded in 1817, in
Edwards County, Illinois, what was the most famous of the English settlements
in Illinois. Birkbeck was an educated man and his writings are among
the important sources for the early history of Illinois. He was at one time
Secretary of State of Illinois. George Flower became the historian of the
settlement.</note> in Illinois, the party was directed to
Pittsburg, which they reached after a wearisome journey
of over three hundred miles across the mountains. At
Pittsburg they bought a little boat for six or seven dollars,
and came down the Ohio to Shawneetown, whence they
proceeded on foot.<note place='foot'>Birkbeck, <q>Letters from
Ill.,</q> 56.</note> In the summer of 1818, a party of
eighty-eight came over the same route in much the same
manner, using flat-boats on the river.<note place='foot'>Flower,
<q>Hist. of the Eng. Settlement in Edwards Co., Ill.,</q> <q>Chicago
Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> I., 95-99.</note> In 1817, John
Mason Peck, with his wife and three children, went from
Litchfield, Connecticut, to Shawneetown, Illinois, in a one-horse
wagon. The journey was begun on July 25 and
Shawneetown was reached on the sixth of November.
<q>Nearly one month was occupied in passing from Philadelphia
through the State of Pennsylvania over the Alleghany
Mountains, till on the 10th of September he passed into
Ohio. Three weeks he journeyed in that State, and on
the 23d of October recrossed the Ohio River into the State
of Kentucky ..., and on the 6th of November
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
again crossed the Ohio River, into the then Territory of
Illinois, at Shawneetown.</q><note place='foot'><q>Memoir
of John Mason Peck,</q> 71, 74.</note> Here the family was delayed
by floods which rendered the roads impassable. Leaving
the horse and wagon at Shawneetown to be brought on by
a friend, they proceeded to St. Louis in a keel-boat, paying
twenty-five dollars fare, and arrived at their destination
on the first of December.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
74-81. The disparity in dates in the latter part of the quotation
suggests that <q>23d of October</q> should probably read <q>3d of October.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Shawneetown was a sort of center from which emigrants
radiated to their destinations. It owed much to its location,
being on the main route from the southern states to
St. Louis and what was then called the Missouri, and being
also the port for the salt works on Saline Creek. It was
the seat of a land-office. The town thus had a business
which was out of all proportion to the number of its permanent
inhabitants. In 1817 it consisted of but about
thirty log houses, a log bank, and a land-office. When a
certain traveler came to the place from the South, in 1818,
he found the number of wagons, horses, and passengers
waiting to cross the Ohio, on the ferry, so great that he
had to wait <q>a great part of the morning</q> for his turn.<note place='foot'>Fearon,
<q>Sketches of America,</q> 258; William Tell Harris, <q>Remarks
Made During a Tour through the U. S. of America in the Years 1817,
1818, 1819.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
During the latter part of the territorial period freight
charges from Philadelphia to Pittsburg, by land, were from
seven to ten dollars per hundredweight;<note place='foot'>Birkbeck,
<q>Journey from Va. to Ill.,</q> 1817, 128.</note> from Pittsburg
to Shawneetown, one dollar; from Louisville to Shawneetown,
thirty-seven cents; and from New Orleans to
Shawneetown, four dollars and a half.<note place='foot'>Fearon, <q>Sketches of Am.,</q>
1817, 260. In Fearon's work 2<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 3<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> is
equal to 50 cents, p. 5.</note> The use of arks
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
was common. These were flat-bottomed boats of a tonnage
of from twenty-five to thirty tons, covered, square at
the ends, of a uniform size of fifty feet in length and
fourteen in breadth, usually sold for seventy-five dollars,
and would carry three or four families. A common practice
was to re-sell them at a somewhat reduced price to
someone going further down the river. Two dollars was
the charge for piloting an ark over the falls of the
Ohio.<note place='foot'>Kingdom, <q>Am. and the British Colonies,</q> 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
There is much truth in the remarks made by a German
traveler in 1818-19. He said: <q>The State of Illinois is
from one thousand to twelve hundred miles distant from
the sea ports. The journey thither is often as costly and
tedious, for a man with a family, as the sea passage. Any
father of a family, unless he is well-to-do, can certainly
count on being impoverished upon his arrival in Illinois.
At Williamsport, on the Susquehanna, I found a Swiss,
who, with his wife and ten children, had spent one thousand
French crown-dollars for their journey. In the village of
Williamsport, an old German schoolmaster, who seems to
have been formerly a merchant in Nassau, told me that
the passage of himself and family had cost thirteen hundred
dollars. For an adult the fare is seventy-five dollars&mdash;one
dollar is equal to one thaler, ten groschen, Prussian&mdash;for
children under twelve years, half so much, for children
of two years, one-fourth so much, and only babes in
arms go free.</q><note place='foot'>Hecke, <q>Reise
durch die Vereinigten Staaten von Nord-Amerika,</q>
1818-19, I., 34.</note>
</p>

<p>
It can now be understood why people emigrated to the
West, and also why many went overland. A family too
poor to go by water could go in a buggy or wagon, and if
poorer still they might walk, as many actually did. The
immigration to Illinois, which was but a small fraction of
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
the great westward movement, was still largely southern
in origin, Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, and even New York
still staying, in large measure, the tide from New England.
In New England it was the <q>Ohio fever</q> and not the
Illinois fever which carried away the people, and the
designation is geographically correct. The men prominent
in Illinois politics at the close of the territorial period, and
at the beginning of the state period, were natives of southern
states, a fact hardly conceivable if New England had
been largely represented in Illinois. Then, too, the natural
routes from the South led to, or near to, Illinois, the great
road from the South crossing the Ohio River at Shawneetown,
and the Kentucky and Cumberland rivers being
natural water routes. Another fact to be noticed is that
much of the emigration was of relatives and friends to
join those who had gone before, and as Virginia, Maryland,
Kentucky, Tennessee, the Carolinas, and even Georgia,
had furnished a large number of early settlers to Illinois,
this was a powerful inducement to continued emigration
from the same sources. Similarly Ohio and Michigan had
early received settlers from the East.
</p>

<p>
Immigration to Illinois was not large in comparison to
that to neighboring states or territories. Indians still held
the greater part of Illinois, and the inconveniences incident
to frontier life were more pronounced as the distance
from the East increased. Pro-slavery men, and anti-slavery
men as well, were still in doubt as to the ultimate
fate of slavery in Illinois. This had a deterrent effect
upon immigration.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Life of the Settlers.</head>

<p>
According to the marshal's return the manufactures
in Illinois, in 1810, were as follows:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Spinning-wheels, $630</l>
<l>Looms, 460; cloth produced, 90,039 yards, $54,028</l>
<l>Tanneries, 9; leather dressed, $7,750</l>
<l>Distilleries, 10,200 gallons, $7,500</l>
<l>Flour, 6,440 barrels, $32,200</l>
<l>Maple sugar, 15,600 lbs., $1,980<note place='foot'>Warden,
<q>Acct. of the U. S. of N. A.,</q> 1819, III., 62.</note>&mdash;$104,088</l>
</lg>

<p>
This list incidentally indicates the average price of several
manufactured articles. For the first six months of 1814,
the internal revenue assessed in Illinois was:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Licenses for stills and boilers, $490.14</l>
<l>Carriages, $62.00</l>
<l>Licenses to retailers, $835.00</l>
<l>Stamps, $5.60&mdash;$1392.74</l>
</lg>

<p>
Of this amount ($1392.74), $1047.37 had been paid by
October 10, 1814.<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q> 13th
Cong., 3d Sess.</note> For the period from April 18, 1815,
to February 22, 1816, the following were the internal
duties:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Hats, caps, and bonnets, $ 66.50-½</l>
<l>Saddles and bridles, $65.25</l>
<l>Boots and bootees, $7.26</l>
<l>Leather, $184.35-½&mdash;$323.37</l>
</lg>

<p>
This was the smallest sum listed in any part of the United
States, except Michigan Territory.<note place='foot'><q>State
Papers,</q> 14th Cong., 2d Sess., II., folio. Another volume with
the same number is a quarto.</note> For 1818:
</p>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<lg>
<l>Licenses for stills, $214.91</l>
<l>Licenses  at 20c. per gal., $549.23</l>
<l>Duty on spirits at 25c. per gal., $701.26</l>
<l>On eighteen carriages, $36.75</l>
<l>Licenses to retailers, $1248.80</l>
<l>On stamped paper and bank-notes, $4.50</l>
<l>Manufactured goods, $220.14&mdash;$2975.59</l>
</lg>

<p>
Of this amount, $1966.41 was paid, only Indiana and
Missouri territories paying a smaller proportion of their
assessment.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
14th Cong., 2d Sess., I.</note> The small proportion paid in these three
territories may have been due to the poverty of their
inhabitants.
</p>

<p>
Most of the manufactured articles were consumed within
the territory. Both cotton and flax were raised and made
into cloth; maple sugar was sometimes sold and exported,
but a large proportion of the supply was used as a substitute
for sugar, another substitute much used being wild
honey. A certain Smith's Prairie was celebrated for the
numerous plum and crabapple orchards that grew around
its borders. The large red and yellow plums grew there
in such abundance that people would come from long
distances and haul them away by the wagon-loads, and
would preserve them with honey or maple sugar, which
was the only sweetening they had in pioneer times.<note place='foot'>Ross,
<q>Early Pioneers and Pioneer Events,</q> 65.</note>
</p>

<p>
Previous to the War of 1812, little commerce was carried
on, although a few trips had been made to New Orleans
with keel-boats or pirogues, and some goods were occasionally
brought over the Alleghany Mountains by means
of wagons. The round trip to New Orleans and back
then required six months; the trip down was easy and
required a comparatively short time, but the return trip
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
was slow. It was entirely a barter trade, money being
almost unknown. Furs, wild honey, and other commodities
of Illinois, as well as lead from the Missouri mines, were
carried down and exchanged for groceries, cloth, and other
articles of a large value and small bulk. As a natural
consequence of having to be transported up stream, goods
of that nature were extremely dear, the common price of
tea being sixteen dollars a pound, of coffee fifty cents, and
of calico fifty cents per yard.<note place='foot'>Kingston, <q>Early Western
Days,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> VII., 313.</note> To go up the Mississippi
from St. Louis to Prairie du Chien, in 1815, required from
twelve days to a month, while the return trip was made in
from six to ten days.<note place='foot'>Shaw, <q>Personal Narrative,</q>
in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> II., 225.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the great American Bottom of the Mississippi, extending
from the mouth of the Kaskaskia almost to the mouth
of the Illinois, cattle raising was a leading industry, the
cattle being driven to the Philadelphia or Baltimore markets.<note place='foot'>Fearon,
<q>Sketches of Am.,</q> 1817, 258; Brown, <q>Western Gazetteer;
or, Emigrant's Directory,</q> 1817, 20.</note>
Towards the close of the period land could easily
be secured by government entry. The fertility of the
land was such as must have been new to those immigrants
who came from the poorer parts of the older states.
Land was subject to a tax of a little more that two cents
per acre, the tax being about equally divided between the
territory and the county.<note place='foot'>Birkbeck, <q>Journey from
Va. to Ill.,</q> 1817, 137.</note> Public lands were not to be
taxed by the state, after 1818, until five years from the
date of their sale. Governor Edwards, who was a large
landowner, offered to pay three dollars per acre for plowing.<note place='foot'>Burnham
in <q>Pub. of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.,</q> No. VIII., 181.</note>
Prairies were not yet settled to any considerable
extent, but it is worthy of note that a traveler of 1818-19
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
suggested what was eventually to be the solution of the
question of prairie settlement. He wrote: <q>It will probably
be some time before these vast prairies can be
settled, owing to the inconvenience attending the want of
timber. I know of no way, unless the plan is adopted of
ditching and hedging, and the building of brick houses,
and substituting the stone coal for fuel. It seems as if the
bountiful hand of nature, where it has withheld one gift has
always furnished another; for instance, where there is a
scarcity of wood, there are coal mines.</q><note place='foot'>Harding,
<q>Tour through the Western Country,</q> 8. This passage is
practically plagiarized in Ogden, <q>Letters from the West,</q> and in Thwaites,
<q>Early Western Travels,</q> XIX., 56.</note> The remedy
suggested was the one adopted, except that brick houses
did not become common.
</p>

<p>
Really good roads were entirely lacking. Most of the
settlements were connected by roads that were practicable
at most seasons for packers and travelers on horseback,
but in times of flood the suspension of travel by land was
practically complete. A post-road had been established
between Vincennes and Cahokia in 1805, and in 1810 a
route was established from Vincennes, by way of Kaskaskia,
Prairie du Rocher, and Cahokia, to St. Louis. At this
time and place, however, a post-route does not necessarily
imply anything more than a bridle-path. Mail was received
at irregular intervals, although the trips were regularly
made in good weather. The post-office nearest Chicago
was Fort Wayne, Indiana, whence a soldier on foot carried
the mail once a month.<note place='foot'>Palmer, <q>U. S. and
Canada,</q> 1818, 417; <q>Statutes at Large,</q> II.,
584; <q>Incidents and Events in the Life of Gurdon Saltonstall
Hubbard,</q> 38.</note> A report for the first six months
of 1814 shows, in Illinois, nine post-offices, three hundred
and eighty-eight miles of post-roads, about $143 received for
postage, and $1002 paid for transportation of mail&mdash;a balance
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
of some $859 against the United States.<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q>
13th Cong., 3d Sess.</note> At this
time even Cleveland, Chillicothe, and Marietta received
mail but twice per week.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
13th Cong., 2d Sess., II.</note>
</p>

<p>
Books were very scarce,<note place='foot'><q>Autobiography of Peter
Cartwright,</q> 178; Birkbeck, <q>Journey from
Va. to Ill.,</q> 1817, 128.</note> and no newspapers had been
published in Illinois before its separate territorial organization.
Between 1809 and 1818 there were founded the
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois Herald</hi> and the
<hi rend='italic'>Western Intelligencer</hi>, at Kaskaskia,
the latter becoming the <hi rend='italic'>Illinois Intelligencer</hi> on May 27,
1818; and the <hi rend='italic'>Shawnee Chief</hi>, at
Shawneetown.<note place='foot'>James and Loveless,
<q>Newspapers in Ill. Prior to 1860,</q> <q>Pub. of the
Ill. State Hist. Lib.,</q> No. I., 41, 42, 64, 73, 74; Palmer, <q>U. S. and Canada,</q>
1818, 416.</note> In 1816
the citizens of Shawneetown gave notice through the
papers of Kaskaskia, Frankfort, Kentucky, and Nashville,
Tennessee, that they would apply to the Legislature of
Illinois for the establishment of a bank.<note place='foot'>Burnham,
<q>An Early Ill. Newspaper,</q> <q>Pub. of the Ill. State Hist.
Lib.,</q> No. VIII., 182.</note> This may indicate
that the papers of the places named had a considerable
circulation in Illinois.
</p>

<p>
The character of the immigrants left much to be desired.
A good observer wrote: <q>After residing awhile in White
County, Tennessee, I migrated in May, 1817, to the southern
part of the then Territory of Illinois, and settled in
Madison County, twenty-five miles east of St. Louis, which
town then contained about five thousand inhabitants. The
surrounding country, however, was quite sparsely settled,
and destitute of any energy or enterprise among the
people; their labors and attention being chiefly confined to
the hunting of game, which then abounded, and tilling a
small patch of corn for bread, relying on game for the
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
remaining supplies of the table. The inhabitants were of
the most generous and hospitable character, and were
principally from the southern states; harmony and the
utmost good feeling prevailed throughout the country.</q><note place='foot'>Col.
Daniel M. Parkison, <q>Pioneer Life in Wis.,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc.
Coll.,</q> II., 326-7, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <q>Memoir
of John Mason Peck,</q> 76, 87.</note>
Naturally this description was not of universal application,
but the source of the population and the reasons for
removing from the old homes make it probable that it was
widely appropriate.
</p>

<p>
If it was difficult for an emigrant to reach Illinois, and
if, after reaching it, he was inconvenienced by the poor
facilities for commerce, the bad roads, the infrequency of
mails, the scarcity of schools and churches, he at least
found it easy to obtain a living, and to some of the immigrants
of the territorial period it was worth something not
to starve, even though living was reduced to its lowest
terms. The poorest immigrant had access to land on the
borders of settlement, because the laws against squatting
were not enforced. This same class could procure game
in abundance, while maple sugar, wild honey, persimmons,
crabapples, nuts, pawpaws, wild grapes, wild plums, fish,
mushrooms, <q>greens,</q> berries of several kinds, and other
palatable natural products known to the Illinois frontiersman,
were to be had in most, if not all, of the localities
then settled. Hogs fattened on the mast. Log houses
could be built without nails. The problem of clothing
was probably more difficult at first than that of food, but
although clothing could not be picked up in the woods,
the materials for making it could be grown in the fields.
Spinning, and the processes necessarily preceding and
following it, involved a certain amount of labor. Taxes
were not high, nor were tax laws rigidly enforced. It is
thus easy to understand the reasoning that may have led
a large proportion of the immigrants during this period to
leave their old homes.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The First Years of Statehood,
1818 to 1830.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Indian and Land Questions.</head>

<p>
One of the most important cessions of land in Illinois
ever made by the Indians was that made by the
Kickapoo in 1819, of the vast region lying north of the
parallel of 39&mdash;a little north of the mouth of the Illinois
River, and southeast of the Illinois River.<note place='foot'><q>Indian
Aff.,</q> II., 196-7; <q>18th An. Rept. of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q>
Pt. 2, 696-9, Plate CXXV.; Dana, <q>Sketches of Western Country,</q>
1819, 147. See map of Indian cessions.</note> Settlement
had been crowding hard upon this region and many
squatters anxiously awaited the survey and sale of the
land, especially of that in the famous Sangamon country.
In northern Illinois settlement was still retarded by the
presence of Indians. In 1825, the Menominee, Kaskaskia,
Sauk and Fox, Potawatomi, and Chippewa tribes claimed
over 5,314,000 acres of land in Illinois,<note place='foot'><q>State
Papers,</q> No. 64, 18th Cong., 2d Sess., IV.</note> and there was a
licensed Indian trader at Sangamo, one at the saline near the
present Danville, and two on Fever River.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
No. 118, 19th Cong., 1st Sess., VI.</note> Two years
later there were three such traders at Fever River, and two
at Chicago,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, No. 96, 20th
Cong., 1st Sess., III.; <q>Ex. Doc.,</q> No. 140, 20th
Cong., 1st Sess., IV.</note> and in 1827-28 there was one at Fever River
with a capital of about $2000.<note place='foot'><q>Senate Doc.,</q>
No. 47, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., I.</note> In February, 1829, there
were Indian agents at Chicago, Fort Armstrong, Kaskaskia,
and Peoria, as well as others near the borders of
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
Illinois.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, No.
72, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., I.</note> At this time, the Ottawa, Chippewa, Potawatomi,
Kaskaskia, and Winnebago claimed land in the state,
although only about 6000 of the more than 25,000 members
of these tribes resided in the state. The eight
members of the Kaskaskia tribe held a small reservation
near the Kaskaskia River. Of the twenty-two hundred
members of the Kickapoo tribe, which had relinquished all
claim to land east of the Mississippi, about two hundred
still lived on the Mackinaw River, but they were expected
to move in a few weeks.<note place='foot'><q>Senate Doc.,</q> No. 72, 20th Cong.,
2d Sess., I.; see also <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, No. 27.</note>
By a treaty of July 29, 1829,
the Chippewa, Ottawa, and Potawatomi ceded their claims
in northern Illinois.<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q>
No. 24, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., II.; <q>18th An. Rept.
of the Bureau of Ethnology,</q> Pt. 2, 722-5,
Plate CXXV.</note> There still remained the Winnebago
tribe, and not until 1833 was Illinois to be free from Indian
claims.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
Pt. 2, 736-7, 738-9, 750-1, Plates CXXIV. and CXXV.</note>
</p>

<p>
A war with the Winnebago tribe was imminent in 1827.
Settlers in the northern part of the state either fled to the
southward or collected at such points as Galena or Prairie
du Chien. <q>This was a period of great suffering at Galena.
The weather was inclement and two or three thousand
persons driven suddenly in, with scant provisions, without
ammunition or weapons encamped in the open air, or cloth
tents which were but little better, were placed in a very
disagreeable and critical position.</q><note place='foot'>Tenney, <q>Early
Times in Wis.,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> I., 96.</note> The prompt action of
Governor Lewis Cass, of Michigan, averted what would in
all probability have been a bloody war, if prompt action
had not been taken.<note place='foot'>McLaughlin, <q>Lewis Cass,</q>
125; Young, <q>Life of Gen. Lewis Cass,</q> 93.</note>
</p>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<p>
To September 30, 1819, the record of land sales in
Illinois was as follows:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{1.2cm} p{1.3cm} p{1cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(15) r r r'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Acres Unsold.</cell><cell>Acres Sold.</cell>
     <cell>Price.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Shawneetown</cell><cell>4,561,920</cell><cell>562,296</cell>
     <cell>$1,153,897</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kaskaskia</cell><cell>2,188,800</cell><cell>407,027</cell>
     <cell>1,781,773</cell></row>
<row><cell>Edwardsville</cell><cell>2,625,960</cell><cell>394,730</cell>
     <cell>795,531<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q>
Senate, No. 87, 16th Cong., 1st Sess., II.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The balances unpaid by purchasers of public lands steadily
increased from 1813 to 1819 until on September 30, 1819,
there was due from purchasers of land in the area of the old Northwest
Territory nearly ten million dollars.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
No. 57, 16th Cong., 1st Sess., V.</note> An
increase would have resulted merely from an increased sale
of public lands under the credit system, but it is also true
that the difficulty of collecting the unpaid balances became
so great that the government at last abolished the credit
system, by the act of April 24, 1820. The act provided
that after July 1, 1820, no credit whatever should be given
to the purchasers of public lands; that land might be sold
in either sections, half-sections, quarter-sections, or eighth-sections;
that the minimum price should be reduced from
two dollars to one dollar and twenty-five cents per acre;
and that reverted lands should be offered at auction before
being offered at private sale.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> III., 566-7.</note> At least two of the provisions
of this act had long been desired by Illinois in
common with other frontier regions: the reduction of the
minimum price and the sale in smaller tracts. Under the
new law a man with one hundred dollars could buy eighty
acres of land, while previously the same man would have
had to pay eighty of his one hundred dollars as the first
payment on one hundred and sixty acres, the smallest tract
then sold. The great danger had been that the second,
third, and fourth payments could not be made. In Illinois,
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
before July 1, 1820, there had been sold 1,593,247.53 acres
of the public land at an average price of about $2.02 per
acre. Some of this reverted from non-payment.<note place='foot'>Donaldson,
<q>Public Domain,</q> 200 ff.</note>
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/illus-2.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <figDesc>Illustration: Indian Cessions.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
During the third quarter of 1820, all sales in Illinois
were at the minimum price and a considerable proportion
were of the minimum area. At the same time, some of
the land in Ohio, and a very few tracts in Indiana, sold at
a higher price, one tract in Ohio, but only one, selling for
more than seven dollars per acre.<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q>
No. 35, 10th Cong., 2d Sess., II.</note> To October 1, 1821,
the land-offices in Illinois reported:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(15) r r'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Acres Sold.</cell><cell>Surveyed, but Unsold.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Shawneetown</cell><cell>592,464</cell><cell>2,401,936</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kaskaskia</cell><cell>419,898</cell><cell>1,615,942</cell></row>
<row><cell>Palestine</cell><cell>714</cell><cell>2,880,720</cell></row>
<row><cell>Edwardsville</cell><cell>437,993</cell><cell>2,696,727</cell></row>
<row><cell>Vandalia</cell><cell>7,923</cell><cell>2,545,677</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
All land in the districts of Shawneetown and Kaskaskia
had been surveyed, but the remaining districts were still
indefinite on the north.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q>
III., 533. It is interesting to note that for the five years
ending in 1822, the Pulteney estate of 380,000 acres of land in Steuben and
Alleghany counties, New York, had sold an average of 10,000 acres per
year, at an average price of $3.37 per acre&mdash;<q>Columbian Sentinel,</q> Boston,
Oct. 2, 1822.</note> At this time, Illinois money
passed in the state at par, and the Bank of Illinois was
among those whose notes were received in payment for
public lands.<note place='foot'><q>Illinois Intelligencer,</q> Oct. 30, 1821.</note>
</p>

<p>
As more and more land was opened to settlement, a
new difficulty arose and became increasingly troublesome.
All public land was to be entered at the same minimum
price, and as a natural result, the poorest land was not taken
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
up and settlement became widely dispersed on the best
tracts of land. In December, 1824, the Illinois legislature
sent a memorial to Congress portraying the evils of sparse
settlement, and asking that land that had been offered for
sale for five years or more might be sold at fifty cents per
acre. Better roads, better markets, and better institutions
were expected to result from such sales.<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> IV.. 145; <q> Repts. and S. Doc.,</q> No. 25, 18th Cong.,
2d Sess., II.</note> Two years later,
another memorial was sent. This asked that land be
offered for sale at prices graduated according to the quality
of the land, suggested that the poorest land might well
be donated to settlers, and declared that settlement was
retarded by the high minimum price of land.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q>
IV., 871; <q>S. Doc.,</q> No. 17, 19th Cong., 2d Sess., II.</note> Governor
Ninian Edwards pointed out that in 1790, Hamilton had
recommended that public lands be sold at twenty cents
per acre, which <q>was the price at which Kentucky, long
afterward, sold her lands.</q><note place='foot'><q>H. J.,</q>
Ill., 1826-27, p. 54.</note> In 1828, the Committee on
Public Lands recommended that public lands unsold at
public sale be first offered at one dollar per acre, and if
still unsold, that the price be reduced twenty-five cents per
acre each two years until sold or reduced to twenty-five
cents per acre; that eighty-acre homestead claims be given
to such persons as would cultivate and occupy them for five
years; and that lands unsold at twenty-five cents per acre
be ceded to the states in which they lay, upon payment of
the cost of survey and twenty-five cents per acre. At this
time, there was in Illinois 1,403,482 acres surveyed and sold;
19,684,186 acres surveyed and unsold, of the 39,000,000
acres estimated to be in the State.<note place='foot'><q>Repts. of
Com.,</q> No. 125, 20th Cong., 1st Sess., II.</note> Still another memorial
from the legislature was sent to Congress in 1829. It
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
pointed out, in strong terms, the inconvenience arising from
the high price at which public land was offered for sale.
Unsold public land could neither be taxed nor legally
settled. It was stated that of the forty millions of acres
in Illinois, little over one and one-half millions had been
sold at public sales. A granting of the right of preemption,
which implies the presence in the state of
squatters, is suggested.<note place='foot'><q>Senate Doc.,</q>
No. 58, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., I. For the long and
futile effort made in Congress to secure a law graduating the price of public
lands, see Meigs, <q>Life of Thomas Hart Benton,</q> ch. xi., with the foot references
thereto.</note>
</p>

<p>
The implication of the presence of squatters was well
founded. When Peter Cartwright, in 1823, visited a settlement
in the Sangamon country, he found it a community
of squatters, on land which had been surveyed, but was
not yet offered for sale. Money was hoarded up to enter
land when Congress should order sales. Cartwright paid
a squatter two hundred dollars for his improvement and
his claim, bought some stock, and rented out the place, to
which he was to remove from Kentucky the following
year.<note place='foot'>Strickland, <q>Autobiography of Peter
Cartwright,</q> 246, 254.</note> This squatting on surveyed land, and even on
unsurveyed land, was a regular procedure. It added much
to the difficulty of governing the state&mdash;hence the memorials
to Congress, and hence the great significance to
Illinois of an act of May 29, 1830, which gave to all
settlers who had cultivated land in 1829 the right to preempt
not more than one hundred and sixty acres.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> IV., 420-1.</note> This
law was of general application. Even now the Illinois
legislature sent another petition concerning preemption to
Congress, because one of the provisions of the act of May,
1830, was that the plat of survey should have been filed
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
in the land-office, and this provision debarred about one
thousand Illinois squatters from the benefit of the act. A
modification in their favor was desired.<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> VI., 240.</note>
</p>

<p>
The land claims of the ancient settlers, as they are
called in government documents, continued to occupy the
attention of Congress, in a desultory way, throughout the
period, but their influence upon settlement had practically
ceased with the opening of the public land-offices.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> III., 786; <q>Repts. of Com.,</q> No. 58, 17th Cong.,
1st Sess., I.; <q>Pub. Lands,</q> III., 406, 412-3, 421, 462-3; VI., 23-5; <q>S.
Doc.,</q> No. 10, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., I.</note>
</p>

<p>
Among the obstacles to settlement was the holding of
land by non-residents. Such lands were subject to a triple
tax in case of delinquency, and when sold for taxes and
costs frequently did not bring enough for that purpose, in
which event they reverted to the state and the state paid
the costs. Redemption, although possible, was rare.<note place='foot'><q>Illinois
Intelligencer,</q> Vandalia, Ill., Apr. 24, 1821.</note> In
1823, about nine thousand quarter-sections of land in the
Military Tract, lying between the Illinois and the Mississippi,
were advertised for sale, because of the non-payment
of taxes by non-resident landholders.<note place='foot'><q>Niles'
Register,</q> XXV., 117.</note> At this time, two
of the prominent men of the state who wished to dispose
of a large amount of state paper, advertised that they would pay
such delinquent taxes at twenty-five per cent discount.<note place='foot'><q>Washington
(D. C.) Republican,</q> Sept. 27, 1823.</note>
In 1826, thirty-eight pages of the <hi rend='italic'>Illinois Intelligencer</hi>
were filled with a description, in double column, of lands
owned by non-residents, the lands being for sale for taxes.
In 1829, a similar list filled thirty-two pages.<note place='foot'><q>Illinois
Intelligencer,</q> Oct. 3, 1829.</note> Much discontent
was manifested in the state on account of the laws
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
concerning the public lands, and Governor Edwards'
message to the legislature, in 1830, elaborated a theory
that all public lands belonged of right to the states in
which they lay.<note place='foot'><q>Senate Jour.,</q> Ill.,
1830-31, 8-51. The message was delivered on
Dec. 7, 1830, and Edwards' successor was inaugurated the following day.</note>
</p>

<p>
Illinois early understood that an Illinois-Michigan canal
would help to people her northern lands. This led to
many efforts to secure such a waterway. In 1819 a favorable
topographical report concerning the route for the
proposed canal was made,<note place='foot'><q>State
Papers,</q> No. 17, 16th Cong., 1st Sess., II.</note> and in 1822 the state was
authorized to construct the canal, but no tangible aid was
given.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes at Large,</q> III., 659-60; <q>Niles'
Register,</q> XXII., 59.</note> In 1825 the legislature petitioned Congress for a
grant of the townships through which the canal would
pass. A committee report of March, 1826, which was
almost identical with another presented in February, 1825,
pointed out that the cost of transporting a ton of merchandise
from Philadelphia, New York, or Baltimore was
about ninety dollars, and required from twenty to twenty-two
days. The probable cost by the proposed canal, the
Lakes, and the Erie Canal, from St. Louis to New York
was from sixty-three to sixty-five dollars per ton, and the
time from twelve to fifteen days. The canal would bind
Illinois and Missouri to the North.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q>
IV., 437-8; <q>Repts. of Com.,</q> No. 147, 19th Cong.,
1st Sess., II.; <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, No. 53, 18th Cong.,
2d Sess., I.; <q>S. Doc.,</q> No. 49,
19th Cong., 1st Sess., II.</note> Congress received a
memorial from the legislature on the same subject in
January, 1827, requesting the grant of <q>two entire townships,
along the whole course of the canal,</q> and declaring
that markets at New Orleans fluctuated because of speculators,
and that grain and goods sent from the West to the
Atlantic ports by way of New Orleans was exposed to the
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
dangers of both the southern climate and the
sea.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
No. 46, 19th Cong., 2d Sess., II.; <q>State Papers,</q> No. 81, 19th
Cong., 2d Sess., V.</note> A few
weeks later the desired grant was made, the state being
given one-half of five sections in width on each side of
the canal, the United States reserving the alternate sections.<note place='foot'><q>Pub.
Lands,</q> VI., 27; <q>Statutes at Large,</q> IV., 234.</note>
The canal commissioners promptly platted the
original town of Chicago and sold lots at from twenty to
eighty dollars each, but no immediate settlement followed
the land sale, and Chicago remained for some years longer
an Indian town. The prospect of having a canal doubtless
had some influence upon settlement, but at the close of
1830 the actual construction of the canal was still a thing
of the future. By the close of 1828, Congress had donated
to Illinois, for various purposes, chiefly for schools and
internal improvements, 1,346,000 acres.<note place='foot'><q>S.
Doc.,</q> No. 11, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., I.</note>
</p>

<p>
The salt springs had been vested in the state of Illinois
with the provision that no part of the reservations should
be sold. Large reservations were made at the Saline River
salt works and at the Vermilion saline near Danville, the
object being to reserve a supply of wood for the making
of salt. Upon the discovery of coal near the springs the
state was permitted to sell not more than thirty thousand
acres of the Saline River reservation.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q>
IV., 888, 921; V., 33, 35, 620; <q>Statutes at Large,</q>
IV., 305.</note>
</p>

<p>
Illinois as a landowner sometimes mingled church and
state. The original proprietors of Alton having donated
one hundred lots, one-half for the support of the gospel,
and one-half for the support of a public school, the state
vested the donated lots in the trustees of the town, upon
its incorporation in 1821. A similar donation made by
the proprietors of Mt. Carmel was confirmed in the same
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
manner.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of Ill.,</q> 1820-21,
39-45; 1824-25, 72.</note> The Cumberland Presbyterians having built a
church on a school section, the state provided that for
ninety-nine years the building should be used as a schoolhouse
also, the school being under the joint direction of the trustees
of the township and the church society.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
1820-21, 153-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
The receipts for public lands in 1828 and 1829, respectively,
were:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.9cm} p{1.7cm} p{1.7cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(15) r r'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>1828</cell><cell>1829.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Kaskaskia</cell><cell>$ 4,639.82</cell><cell>$ 10,503.99</cell></row>
<row><cell>Shawneetown</cell><cell>7,250.28</cell><cell>16,058.79</cell></row>
<row><cell>Edwardsville</cell><cell>23,536.49</cell><cell>38,001.35</cell></row>
<row><cell>Vandalia</cell><cell>4,489.71</cell><cell>24,258.13</cell></row>
<row><cell>Palestine</cell><cell>25,671.62</cell><cell>59,026.81</cell></row>
<row><cell>Springfield</cell><cell>56,507.63</cell><cell>108,175.47</cell></row>
<row><cell></cell><cell>$122,095.55</cell><cell>$256,024.54<note place='foot'>The
total receipts from sales of 1829 is erroneously given as $256,124.54
in the original.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The receipts for 1828 were for 96,092.91 acres; of 1829, for
196,324.92 acres.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q> VI., 158-9.</note>
From October 1, 1829, to September
30, 1830, sales, receipts, and prices were:
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1.5cm} p{1.5cm} p{1.6cm} p{1.6cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(15) r r r'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>Acres.</cell><cell></cell>
     <cell>Average Price per Acre.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Illinois</cell><cell>291,401.28</cell><cell>$364,369.87</cell>
     <cell>$1.2504</cell></row>
<row><cell>Indiana</cell><cell>413,253.63</cell><cell>521,715.13</cell>
     <cell>1.2624</cell></row>
<row><cell>Alabama</cell><cell>233,369.27</cell><cell>291,715.20</cell>
     <cell>1.25</cell></row>
<row><cell>Missouri</cell><cell>182,929.63</cell><cell>228,748.12</cell>
     <cell>1.2505</cell></row>
<row><cell>Michigan</cell><cell>106,201.28</cell><cell>132,751.68</cell>
     <cell>1.25</cell></row>
<row><cell>Ohio</cell><cell>160,182.14</cell><cell>201,923.50</cell>
     <cell>1.2606</cell></row>
<row><cell>Mississippi</cell><cell>103,795.61</cell><cell>130,475.87</cell>
     <cell>1.257<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, VI.,
219; <q>H. Ex. Doc.,</q> No. 19, 21st Cong., 2d Sess., I.</note></cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The northward movement of population in Illinois is well
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
indicated by the figures for 1828 and 1829. The Indian
barrier was being pushed back, and the Sangamon country,
with its land-office at Springfield, was a favorite place for
settlement. The rapid increase in the amount of land
sold is also striking. As the third decade of the century
closed Indiana was the favorite place for frontier settlement.
The sales of public lands in Ohio were diminishing.
A prophetic glance would have seen that as the ever-shifting
frontier passed westward Illinois was to overtake
and then to far surpass Indiana in number of settlers.
</p>

<p>
The period from 1818 to 1830 saw the Indian title to a
great fertile tract of land in Illinois extinguished, the price
of all public lands lowered and the land offered for sale in
smaller tracts, the right of preemption granted to squatters
who had settled before 1830, considerable grants of land
made to the state for internal improvements, the great salt
spring reservations reduced. These changes did much to
make Illinois a more attractive place for settlement.
When a committee of workingmen in Wheeling, Virginia,
made a report, in October, 1830, on a method of escaping
from the ills of workingmen, they presented an elaborate
plan for buying land and forming a colony in Illinois.<note place='foot'><q>Rept.
of a Meeting of Workingmen in the City of Wheeling, Va., on
Forming a Settlement in the State of Ill.,</q> Oct. 4, 1830, 1-12.</note>
The experience of the squatter who settled with four or
five sows for breeders and in four years or less drove forty-two
fat hogs to market and sold them for $135, with which
he bought eighty acres of land and paid his debts, was not
a rare one.<note place='foot'><q>Information for
Emigrants,</q> London, 1848, 33, first pagination. The
hogs were sold in 1829.</note>
</p>

<p>
As 1830 closed there were still problems connected with
the land to solve. The Indian question persisted, non-resident
landholders were troublesome, and the state
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
would still seek grants for internal improvements, but none
of these was to be long a serious impediment to settlement.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Government and Its Representatives,
1818 to 1830.</head>

<p>
In some respects the character of the state government
of Illinois shows the character of the settlers. The nativity
of the governors and the congressmen of the state indicates
that the South was the origin of a majority of the population.
Before the end of 1830 there had been no northern-born
representative of the state in the national House of
Representatives; the first northern-born senator was chosen
in the last month of 1825, and the first northern governor
in 1830.<note place='foot'><p>Senators from Illinois:
</p>
<p>
Ninian Edwards, Maryland, Dec. 4, 1818-Mar. 4, 1824<lb/>
Jesse B. Thomas, Maryland, Dec. 4, 1818-Mar. 3, 1829<lb/>
John McLean, North Carolina, Dec. 20, 1824-Mar. 3, 1825<lb/>
and Dec. 7, 1829-Oct. 14, 1830<lb/>
Elias K. Kane, New York, Dec. 5, 1825-Dec. 11, 1835<lb/>
David J. Baker, Connecticut, Dec. 6, 1830-Jan. 4, 1831
</p>
<p>
Representatives from Illinois:
</p>
<p>
John McLean, North Carolina, Dec. 4, 1818-Mar. 3, 1819<lb/>
Daniel P. Cook, Kentucky, Dec. 6, 1819-Mar. 3, 1827<lb/>
Joseph Duncan, Kentucky, Dec. 3, 1827-Nov.  1834
</p>
<p>
Governors of Illinois:
</p>
<p>
1809-1818: Ninian Edwards, Maryland<lb/>
1818-1822: Shadrach Bond, Maryland<lb/>
1822-1826: Edward Coles, Virginia<lb/>
1826-1830: Ninian Edwards, Maryland<lb/>
1830-1834: John Reynolds, Pennsylvania
</p>
<p>
The governors from 1834-1842 were from Kentucky, 1842-1861 from the
North, 1861-1873 from Kentucky. During the period 1846-1853, Illinois
had a Democratic governor (Augustus C. French), from New Hampshire, this
being the only instance of an Illinois governor from New England.</p></note>
Pierre Menard, a French Canadian, the first
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
lieutenant-governor, came to Illinois in 1790, and can not
fairly be cited as a type of the French descendants of the
first white settlers of Illinois.<note place='foot'>Sulte,
<q>Histoire des Canadiens-Français,</q> VIII., 53.</note> As a matter of fact, the
French element was not a political factor of importance.
Nor is it true that all southerners were pro-slavery, for the
most noted anti-slavery governor of Illinois, and her governor
during the Civil War, were from the South, while
her first northern senator was pro-slavery. The great
influx of immigrants from New England and the rest of
the North did not come until after 1830. It was retarded,
after the opening of the Erie Canal (1825), by the Winnebago
and Black Hawk wars, and did not reach its height
until the latter war had closed and the Indian claims to
land in northern Illinois had been extinguished. Immigration
from the northern states increased proportionally,
however, after 1820.
</p>

<p>
Illinois men in Congress give a number of indications of
the feeling of the people on questions having a more or
less intimate relation to settlement. Constant and insistent
demands for more land-offices, more post-roads, more
pensions, donations of land for poor settlers, grants of
land for internal improvements, the right of preëmption
for squatters, and the reduction of the price of public
lands show that the frontier was in favor of a liberal governmental
expenditure.<note place='foot'><q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 15th Cong.,
2d Sess., 436, 704; <q>H. J.,</q> 15th Cong.,
2d Sess., 100, 136-7, 273, 308; <q>S. J.,</q> 15th Cong., 2d Sess., 239, 240,
278-85, 322; 16th Cong., 1st Sess., 107, 201-2, 245; <q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 16th
Cong., 1st Sess., I., 450-2, 482-5; II., 1331-3; <q>S. J.,</q> 21st Cong., 2d
Sess., 38, 48, 51.</note> Congressmen from Illinois, without
exception, favored the tariff bills of 1824 and 1828.<note place='foot'><q>S.
J.,</q> 18th Cong., 1st Sess., 401; <q>H. J.,</q> 18th Cong., 1st Sess., 428;
<q>Cong. Debates,</q> 20th Cong., 1st Sess., IV. 786, 2471.</note>
In 1828, the only senator from Illinois who voted on the
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
question, voted for the bill abolishing imprisonment for
debt on processes issuing from a United States court.<note place='foot'><q>Cong.
Debates,</q> 20th Cong., 1st Sess., IV., 90.</note>
Since Illinois early abolished such imprisonment, it is
interesting to note that three hundred and thirty-eight
persons were committed to the Essex county jail in New
Jersey, for debt, in the year ending April 1, 1823, of whom
one hundred and forty-one were in close confinement.
The aggregate of debt was fifty-five thousand dollars.<note place='foot'><q>Ohio
Republican,</q> April 19, 1823.</note>
</p>

<p>
Within the state one of the phenomena which has characterized
frontier regions appeared about the year 1821.
A desperate gang of immigrants had robbed and plundered
until, after a most notable robbery, <q>a public meeting was
held, and among other things, a company was formed,
consisting of ten law-abiding men of well-known courage,
who bound themselves together, under the name of the
Regulators of the Valley, to rid the country of horse
thieves and robbers.... A regular constitution was
drawn up and subscribed to.</q> After the leader of the
desperadoes had been killed the remainder fled.<note place='foot'>Eames,
<q>Historic Morgan and Classic Jacksonville,</q> 22. A letter from
the son of Mr. Eames, now deceased, says that search has failed to recover
the constitution of the Regulators of the Valley. Regulators were also useful
in preventing speculators from entering the claims of squatters, even when the
squatter was too poor to enter his own claim&mdash;Henderson, <q>Early Hist. of
the Sangamon Country,</q> 21. For another instance, see Blaney, <q>Excursion
through the U. S.,</q> 233-6; also, Reynolds, <q>My Own Times,</q> 1879,
113.</note> A frontier
condition is indicated also by the fact that when
Sangamon county was formed, on January 30, 1821, a
special law provided that housekeepers in the county
should perform the duties and receive the privileges of
freeholders. The same provision was made for Morgan
county two years later. As land sales in the Sangamon
country, in which these counties lay, did not begin until
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
November, 1823, these laws probably resulted from the
formation of counties whose entire population consisted of
squatters.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of Ill.,</q>
1820-21, pp. 45-6; 1822-23, p. 109; Henderson, <q>Early
Hist. of the Sangamon Country,</q> 21.</note>
The persistence of wolf bounties bears testimony
to continued wild surroundings.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of
Ill.,</q> 1822-23, p. 86 ff.; 1824-25, p. 116.</note> In 1829 alien
Irish, and presumably all other aliens, could vote at all
elections. An election law of this year provided that
voting should be by the voter's approaching the bar, in
the election room, and naming in an audible voice the
persons for whom he voted, or, if the voter preferred, by
delivering to the judges a ballot which should be read
aloud by them, the alternative being for the benefit of
illiterate voters. Voting had previously been by ballot.<note place='foot'><q>Miners'
Journal,</q> Galena, Dec. 22, 1829; <q>Revised Laws of Ill.,</q>
1829, 57; <q>H. J.,</q> (Ill.), 1828-29, p. 57.</note>
</p>

<p>
Although frontier conditions obtained, there were evidences
of their gradual amelioration. A law of 1823
provided that counterfeiting, which, in the territorial period,
had been punishable by death, should be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars, whipping with
not fewer than one hundred nor more than two hundred
lashes, imprisonment for not more than twelve months,
and being rendered forever infamous.<note place='foot'><q>Laws
of Ill.,</q> 1822-23, pp. 149-51.</note> The state established
a system of common schools to be supported, in
part, by the state, in 1825; but in 1829 the sections of
the act which provided that two per cent of all money
received into the state treasury, and five-sixths of the
interest of the school fund, should be for the support of
public schools, were repealed,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1824-25,
pp. 121-8; <q>Revised Laws of Ill.,</q> 1829, 149.</note> taxation for such a purpose
not being then in accord with public sentiment. A
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
mechanic's lien law, passed in 1825, provided that in case
of a contract between a landowner and a mechanic, the
mechanic should have a lien upon the product of his labor
for three months, after which the lien lapsed unless suit
had been commenced. Three years later an unsuccessful
attempt to secure such a law was made in New York.<note place='foot'><q>Revised
Laws of Ill.,</q> 1829, p. 100; McMaster, <q>Rights of Man in
Am.,</q> 97.</note>
</p>

<p>
Two accounts on the records of the state are of sufficient
interest to give at length. The first gives the amount of
money received into the treasury during the two years
ending December 27, 1822:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>The amount paid into the treasury by the
different sheriffs within the two years ending
as aforesaid, is $ 7,121.09</q>
</p>

<p>
The amount of a judgment obtained against
the former sheriff of Randolph [County]
for non-resident tax of 1818, is 147.14
</p>

<p>
The amount from non-residents for the two
preceding years, including back taxes,
redemptions, interest, &amp;c., is 38,437.75
</p>

<p>
The amount from non-residents' bank stock, is 97.77
</p>

<p>
The amount from the Saline on the Ohio, is 10,563.09
</p>

<p>
The amount from the Saline on Muddy river, is 200.00
</p>

<p>
The amount from the sale of Lots in the town
of Vandalia, is 5659.86
</p>

<p>
<q rend='post'>Total amount of money paid at the Treasury
between the 1st of January, 1821, and the
27th of December, 1822, $62,226.70</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The balance in the treasury was $33,661.11, but Governor
Edwards, in his message of December 2, 1828, reported a
state indebtedness of $44,140.03 and taxes in Illinois as
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
precisely eight times as high as those in Kentucky which
were payable in the same kind of currency.<note place='foot'><q>Laws
of Ill.,</q> 1822-23, pp. 229-30.</note> The rage for
internal improvements was partly responsible, and for this
in turn the wide dispersion of the settlements in Illinois,
caused by the fact that all public lands were offered at the
same minimum price and that the prairies were in large
measure shunned, furnishes a partial explanation.
</p>

<p>
The second account of the state, above referred to, shows
that in 1822 it cost $151.82 to make a trip from Vandalia
to Shawneetown and return, and one from Vandalia to
Kaskaskia and return, to convey to the capital some
money paid by the United States on the three per cent
fund due the state. The former trip occupied fourteen
days, the latter eight days.<note place='foot'><q>H. J.,</q> Ill., 1828-29, p. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
Governor Cass' protection of Galena during the Winnebago
War of 1827 may have been influenced by its
uncertain governmental status. In 1828 miners in what is
now southwestern Wisconsin voted for members of Congress
from Illinois, and in 1829 Galena was enumerated
among the thriving towns of Huron or Ouisconsin Territory.
November 29, 1828, one hundred and eighty-seven
inhabitants of Galena and vicinity sent a memorial to
Congress asking that a separate territory be formed, the
territory to be bounded on the south by a line drawn due
west from the southern point of Lake Michigan to the
Mississippi, and by the northern boundary of Missouri.
The memorial began: <q>The undersigned, inhabitants of
that portion of the <q>Territory Northwest of the Ohio,</q> lying
north of a due east and west line drawn through the
southernmost end of Lake Michigan, and west of that
lake to the British possessions, comprehending the mining
district, more generally known as the Fever River Lead
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
Mines.</q> The petitioners referred to the violation of the
Ordinance of 1787, and also stated that they were subject
to two separate governments, each some hundreds of miles
from them, and each unacquainted with their needs. The
petition was read and tabled.<note place='foot'>Tenney, <q>Early Times
in Wis.,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> I., 97;
<q>Niles' Register,</q> XXXVII., 53; <q>State Papers,</q> No. 35, 20th Cong., 2d
Sess., II.</note> It is true that the situation
of Galena was peculiarly difficult. No mail could be
carried along the rude trail from Peoria to Galena during
the wet season, and when the Illinois legislature, seeking
to give relief, passed a bill for laying out a road between
the <q>Illinois settlements and Galena,</q> it was vetoed by the
governor and council because the road would pass through
lands of the United States and of the Indians. When
the river was frozen provisions were very high, and mail
was sent forward from Fort Edwards once a month. These
conditions were more aggravating as the number of inhabitants
increased, and in 1827, notwithstanding the trouble
with the Winnebago Indians, there were about four thousand
men at Galena, and they mined about fifteen times
as much lead as had been mined in 1823. In January,
1828, a congressional committee reported favorably on a
proposition to open a road to Galena.<note place='foot'><q>Repts. of
Com.,</q> No. 177, 20th Cong., 1st Sess., III.; Meeker,
<q>Early Hist. of the Lead Region of Wis.,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> VI.,
278-9.</note> In a letter written
one year later by the delegate from Michigan Territory, to
the committee on territories, the suggestion is made that
a new territory, to be called Huron, should be formed,
because the region at Galena was said to have received
hundreds of settlers during the preceding summer and
to have at the time of writing ten thousand or more,
and government in the lead region could not be properly
carried on from Detroit, which was eight hundred or one
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
thousand miles distant, by the routes commonly traveled.
The legislature of Michigan was said to be compelled to
meet in the summer in order to enable delegates to attend
and that was the busy time at the mines.<note place='foot'><q>State
Papers,</q> No. 66, 20th Cong., 2d Sess., II.</note> A congressional
act of February, 1829, provided for the laying out of a
village at Galena. The plat was not to exceed one section
of land, no lot was to be larger than one-fourth of an
acre, unimproved lots were to be sold at not less than five
dollars, improved lots were to be graded, without reference
to their improvements, into three grades, to sell at the rate
of twenty-five, fifteen, and ten dollars, respectively, per
acre, the occupants having the right of preëmption.<note place='foot'><q>Statutes
at Large,</q> IV., 334.</note>
Another mode of relief, which the inhabitants were working
out for themselves, is described in a Galena paper of
September 14, 1829: <q>Mr. Soulard's wagon and mule
team returned, a few days since, from Chicago, near the
southernmost bend of Lake Michigan; to which place it
had been taken across the country, with a load of lead.
This is the first wagon that has ever passed from the Mississippi
River to Chicago. The route taken from the
mines was, to Ogee's ferry, on Rock River, eighty miles;
thence an east course sixty miles, to the Missionary establishment
on the Fox River of the Illinois; and thence a
north-easterly course sixty miles to Chicago, as travelled,
two hundred miles. The wagon was loaded with one ton
and a half of lead. The trip out was performed in eleven,
and the return trip in eight days. The lead was taken, by
water, from Chicago to Detroit. Should a road be surveyed
and marked, on the best ground, and the shortest
distance, a trip could be performed in much less time.
And if salt could be obtained at Chicago, from the New
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
York Salt Works, it would be a profitable and advantageous
trade.</q><note place='foot'><q>Galena Advertiser,</q> Sept. 14, 1829.</note>
</p>

<p>
As the life history of an individual recapitulates the
history of the development of a species, so does the history
of Galena, in respect to the difficulties of its early settlers,
recapitulate the history of the several parts of the United
States in their early days. As Illinois had sent petitions
for relief to the governments of the Northwest Territory,
of Indiana Territory, and of the United States, so did
Galena send similar petitions to the governments of Illinois,
of Michigan Territory, and of the United States. In each
case the prayers of the petitioners were but partially
granted. In each case the difficulties from Indians, lack of
facilities for commerce, distance from the seat of government,
inability to secure lands, were gradually mitigated
until the steady onward sweep of settlement engulfed the
outlying region and it ceased to be the frontier, and
turned its energies to other questions&mdash;different, although
probably as difficult. Galena, even at the close of 1830,
was a frontier region on the outskirts of Illinois settlement.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Transportation.</head>

<p>
Transportation was long a difficult problem, although it
became gradually less so. Travel by either water or land
was slow and difficult. When a party of about one hundred
men, conducted by Colonel R. M. Johnson, went, in
six or eight boats, from St. Louis to the site of the present
Galena, in 1819, to make an arrangement with the Indians
which would permit the whites to mine lead, the upward
voyage occupied some twenty days.<note place='foot'>Bonner, <q>Life and
Adventures of Beckwourth,</q> 20, 21. Written from
Beckwourth's dictation.</note> Doubtless the journey
of Edward Coles from Albemarle county, Virginia, to
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
Illinois, in 1819, was typical of that of the better class of
immigrants. At the Virginia homestead, slaves, horses
and wagons were prepared for the long journey. A trusty
slave was put in charge of the caravan of emigrant wagons
and started out on the long journey over the Alleghanies
to Brownsville, Pennsylvania. Mr. Coles started a few
days later, overtook the party one day's journey from
Brownsville, and upon arriving at that place bought two
flat-bottomed boats, upon which negroes, horses and
wagons, with their owner, were embarked. The drunken
pilot was discharged at Pittsburg, and Coles acted as captain
and pilot on the voyage of some six hundred miles
down the Ohio to a point below Louisville, whence, the
boats being sold, the journey was continued by land to
Edwardsville, Illinois.<note place='foot'>Washburne, <q>Sketch of Edward Coles,</q>
48.</note>
</p>

<p>
April 5, 1823, a party of forty-three started from Cincinnati
in a keel-boat, arriving at Galena, June 1, 1823.
Twenty-two days were required to stem the flooded
Mississippi from the mouth of the Ohio to St. Louis, and
twenty of these were rainy days.<note place='foot'>Meeker,
<q>Early Hist. of the Lead Region of Wis.,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist.
Soc. Coll.,</q> VI., 276-9.</note> In 1822 the English
settlement in Edwards county sent several flat-boats loaded
with corn, flour, beef, pork, sausage, etc., to New Orleans.<note place='foot'>Blaney,
<q>Excursion through the U. S. and Canada,</q> 159.</note>
Improvement of the Wabash was entrusted to an incorporated
company in 1825, and several years earlier a canal
across the peninsula at the junction of the Ohio and the
Mississippi was contemplated.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXVIII., 168; Dana, <q>Sketches of Western Country,</q>
1819, 154; <q>Laws of Ill. Ter.,</q> 1817-18, pp. 57-64.</note>
</p>

<p>
Many immigrants came overland. The following is
typical: <q>In the year 1819 a party of six men, and families
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
of three of them, started from Casey County, Kentucky,
for Illinois.... The first three were young unmarried
men, the last three had their wives and children with them.
They came in an old-fashioned Tennessee wagon, that
resembled a flat-boat on wheels. The younger readers of
this sketch can form but a faint idea of the curious and
awkward appearance of one of these old fashioned wagons,
covered over with white sheeting, the front and rear bows
set at an angle of forty-five degrees to correspond with
the ends of the body, and then the enormous quantity of
freight that could be stowed away in the hole would
astonish even a modern omnibus driver! Women, children,
beds, buckets, tubs, old fashioned chairs, including all the
household furniture usually used by our log-cabin ancestors;
a chicken coop, with <q>two or three hens and a jolly
rooster for a start,</q> tied on behind, while, under the wagon,
trotted a full-blood, long-eared hound, fastened by a short
rope to the hind axle. Without much effort on your part,
you can, in imagination, see this party on the road, one of
the men in the saddle on the near horse, driving; the other
two, perhaps on horseback, slowly plodding along in the
rear of the wagon, while the boys <q>walked ahead,</q> with
rifles on their shoulders <q>at half-mast,</q> on the lookout for
squirrels, turkey, deer, or
<q><hi rend='italic'>Injin</hi>.</q></q><note place='foot'>Henderson,
<q>Early Hist. of the Sangamon Country,</q> 13.</note> Muddy roads sometimes
caused emigrants to make long detours in the
hope of finding better ones, and if the roads became
impassable water transportation might be resorted to when
the locality permitted.<note place='foot'>Reid, <q>Sketch of Enoch
Long,</q> <q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> Il., 61-2.</note> The fear of breaking down was
omnipresent and danger from professional bandits<note place='foot'><q>Pub. No.
8 of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.,</q> 156; Strickland, <q>Autobiography
of Peter Cartwright,</q> 200-1; Faux, <q>Memorable Days in Am.,</q> 310.</note> was not
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
lacking. There was also danger of being lost on the
enormous prairies in Illinois.<note place='foot'><q>Reminiscences
of Levi Coffin,</q> 89-99.</note>
</p>

<p>
The best road from North Carolina to Indiana, for loaded
wagons, was that which crossed the Blue Ridge at Ward's
Gap, in Western Virginia, led through East Tennessee and
Kentucky, and reached the Ohio River at
Cincinnati,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 76.</note> and
this was a part of the route for some of the Illinois immigrants.
Illustrations of the moving instinct, the ever-present desire to go
frontierward, were constantly appearing.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
94-5; Mrs. Delilah Mullin-Evans, in <q>Trans. of the McLean Co.
(Ill.) Hist. Soc.,</q> II., 17; Hecke, <q>Reise durch die Vereinigten Staaten,</q>
I., 37-8.</note>
Although the greater proportion of immigrants
came by either wagon or boat, some came on horseback
and some on foot.<note place='foot'>Loomis, <q>Notes of
a Journey to the Great West,</q> pages unnumbered;
<q>Niles' Register,</q> XXII., 320.</note> One pioneer wrote: <q>My mother was
a delicate woman and in the hope of prolonging her life,
my father, in 1830, broke up his home at Windsor, Connecticut,
and started overland for Jacksonville, Illinois.
Most of the household furniture was shipped by water, <hi rend='italic'>via</hi>
New Orleans and did not reach its destination until a year
afterwards, six months after our arrival. The wagon for
my mother was made strong and wide, drawn by three
horses, so that a bed could be put in it and most of the
way she lay in this bed. Most of the time the drive was
pleasant but over the mountains it was rough and over the
national corduroy road of Indiana, it was perfectly
horrible.</q><note place='foot'><q>Stories of the Pioneer
Mothers of Ill.,</q> MS. in Ill. State Hist. Lib.</note>
A journey was made in 1827 in about four weeks
over the same route that it had taken the same traveler
seven and a half weeks to cover in 1822.<note place='foot'>Tillson,
<q>Reminiscences,</q> 120.</note>
</p>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<p>
Within the state changes in facilities for transportation
were constant. From Shawneetown to St. Louis, by way
of Kaskaskia and Cahokia, passed the great western road.
There was also a road from Shawneetown, by way of
Carmi, to Birkbeck's settlement in Edwards county.<note place='foot'>Melish,
<q>Information and Advice to Emigrants,</q> 1819, 108.</note>
Frontier roads to different places seem to have been designated
by different numbers of notches cut in the trees
along the wayside.<note place='foot'>Woods, <q>Residence in
Ill.,</q> 140.</note> New roads were in constant demand.
In February, 1821, the legislature authorized the building
of a turnpike road, one hundred feet wide, from the Mississippi,
opposite St. Louis, across the American Bottom to
the Bluffs. Toll was to be regulated by the county commissioners,
but it must be not less than twelve and one-half
cents for a man and horse, twenty-five cents for a one-horse
wagon or carriage, six and one-fourth cents for each
wheel and each horse of other wagons and carriages, six
and one-fourth cents for each single horse or head of
cattle, and two cents for each hog or sheep. If at any
time the county should pay the cost of the road, plus six
per cent, the county should become the owner.<note place='foot'><q>Laws
of Ill.,</q> 1820-21, pp. 94-6.</note> A traveler
writing late in 1822 says that a public road had just been
opened between Vandalia and Springfield.<note place='foot'>Tillson,
<q>Reminiscences,</q> 54.</note> During the
same year, Gurdon Saltonstall Hubbard, one of the most
active of the agents of the American Fur Company in
Illinois, established a direct path or track from Iroquois
Post to Danville. In 1824 this path, which was known as
<q>Hubbard's Trail,</q> was extended northward to Chicago,
and southward to a point about one hundred and fifty
miles southwest of Danville. Along this trail trading-posts
were established at intervals of forty or fifty miles.
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
The southern extremity of the trail was Blue Point, in
Effingham county.<note place='foot'>Hamilton, <q>Incidents and
Events in the Life of Gurdon Saltonstall
Hubbard,</q> 136.</note> This became the regularly traveled
route between points connected by it.
</p>

<p>
Springfield was the northern terminus of the mail route
early in 1823, and the next year Sangamon county, in which
the village lay, was almost entirely without ferries, bridges,
or roads.<note place='foot'>Tillson, <q>Reminiscences,</q>
81; Strickland, <q>Autobiography of Peter
Cartwright,</q> 250.</note> In 1830 mail was carried between Vincennes
and St. Louis thrice a week; between Maysville and St.
Louis, and between Belleville and St. Charles twice a
week. No point in Illinois, not on one of these routes,
received mail oftener than once a week. There was at
this time a mail route from Peoria to Galena.<note place='foot'><q>State
Papers,</q> No. 77, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., III.</note> The legislatures
of Indiana and Illinois petitioned Congress for an
appropriation to improve the mail route from Louisville,
Kentucky, to St. Louis, Missouri. The length of that part
of the route which lay between Vincennes and St. Louis
was one hundred and sixty miles, but a more direct route,
recently surveyed by authority of the legislature of Illinois,
reduced the distance to one hundred and forty-five miles.
The distance between Vincennes and St. Louis was made
up of about one-fourth of timber land and three-fourths
of prairies, from five to twenty miles across. <q>The settlements
are therefore scattered, and far between, and confined
to the vicinity of the timbered land. More than nineteen-twentieths
of the land, over which the road passes, is the
property of the Federal Government. To make the
necessary causeways and bridges, and to keep the road in
a proper state of repair, is beyond the capacity of the
people who reside upon it.</q> Another writer says of the
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
route: <q>It must, for many years, be the channel of communication,
through which the Government shall transmit,
and receive, all its intelligence relative to the mines in the
region of Galena, and Prairie Du Chien, the Military Posts
of the Upper Mississippi, Missouri, and their tributary
streams, and the whole northwestern Indian frontier.</q><note place='foot'><q>S.
Doc.,</q> No. 28, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., I.</note>
</p>

<p>
Galena remained much isolated. A man who had
horses and cattle, purchased in southern Illinois and driven
to Galena, by way of Springfield and Peoria, in 1823, says
that there was no settlement between Peoria and Fever
River. A year before, a traveler who went from St. Louis
to Galena, on horseback, arrived in time to assist in completing
the second cabin in the place.<note place='foot'>Meeker, <q>Early
Hist. of the Lead Region of Wis.,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist.
Soc. Coll.,</q> VI., 278-9.</note> Two travelers who
walked from Upper Alton to Galena, in January and February,
1826, had to camp out several nights, because no
residence was in reach. Much of the way no trail existed.<note place='foot'>Reid,
<q>Sketch of Enoch Long,</q> Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll., II., 67-8.
See also Owen, in <q>Deutsch-Amerikanische Geschichtsblatter,</q> Jahrgang
2, Heft 2, 42.</note>
About 1827 it was common for men to go with teams of
four yoke of oxen, and strong canvas-covered wagons
from southern Illinois to the lead regions. In those
regions they spent the summer in hauling from the mines
to the furnaces or from the furnaces to the place of shipment,
usually Galena, and taking back to the mines a load
of supplies. In the fall the teamsters returned to their
homes, sometimes, in the early days, taking a load of lead
to St. Louis. These men lived in their wagons, and cooked
their own food. The oxen lived by browsing at night.<note place='foot'>Chetlain,
<q>Recollections of Seventy Years,</q> 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
Transportation rates can be only approximately given,
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
because they varied with the condition of the weather or
of the roads, and were frequently agreed upon by a special
bargain. In 1817 steamboats are said to have descended
the Ohio and the Mississippi at the rate of ten miles per
hour, and to have charged passengers six cents per mile.
Freight, by steamboat, from New Orleans to Shippingport
(Falls of the Ohio), and thence by boats to Zanesville, was
about $6.50 per 100 pounds.<note place='foot'>Hulme, in Cobbett. <q>Year's
Residence in the U. S.,</q> 279, 302.</note> It took about one month to
make the trip from New Orleans to Shawneetown&mdash;June
6 to July 10 in a specific case. Nine-tenths of the trade
was still carried on in the old style&mdash;by flat-boats, barges,
pirogues, etc.<note place='foot'>Birkbeck, <q>Letters from Ill.,</q>
113; Birkbeck, <q>Jour. from Va. to Ill.,</q>
133-4.</note> In December, 1817, freight from Shawneetown
to Louisville was $1.12-½ per hundred weight; to New
Orleans, $1.00; to Pittsburg, $3.50; to Shawneetown from
Pittsburg, $1.00; from Louisville, $0.37-½; from New
Orleans, $4.50. The great difference between the rates up
stream and those down stream was due to the difficulty of
going against the current.<note place='foot'>Fearon, <q>Sketches of
Am.,</q> 260, repeated in Kingdom, <q>Am. and the
British Colonies,</q> 63. In the works of Fearon
and Kingdom 4<hi rend='italic'>s.</hi> 6<hi rend='italic'>d.</hi> are
equal to $1.00.</note> Cobbett estimated that Birkbeck's
settlement, fifty miles north of Shawneetown, could
be reached from the eastern seaboard for five pounds
sterling per person.<note place='foot'>Cobbett, <q>A Year's Residence
in the U. S.,</q> 337.</note> In 1819, the passenger rate, by steamboat,
from New Orleans to Shawneetown, was $110; the
freight rate $0.04-½ to $0.06 per pound, the high charges
being attributed to a lack of competition, which the many
new boats then building were expected to remedy.<note place='foot'>Birkbeck,
<q>Extracts,</q> 4.</note> A
party of nine people with somewhat more than six thousand
pounds of luggage, wishing to start from Baltimore
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
for Illinois, in July, 1819, learned that the water was so low
that large boats could with difficulty pass from Pittsburg
to Wheeling. They accordingly went from Baltimore to
Wheeling, a distance of two hundred and eighty miles, by
land. They had two wagons with six horses and a driver
to each wagon. The price for transportation was three
hundred and fifty dollars. At Wheeling a contract was
made for transportation to Louisville, six hundred miles
distance. For this, fifty dollars was paid, the passengers
agreeing to help navigate the boat. At Louisville an ark
was bought for twenty-five dollars, and two men were
hired for eighteen dollars and their board, to take the party
to Shawneetown, about three hundred miles distant. At
Shawneetown the master of a keel-boat was engaged to
take the luggage of six thousand pounds to a point about
eleven miles from Birkbeck's settlement, for 37-½ cents
per hundred pounds. The travelers proceeded on foot. The
time occupied in the journey was: From Baltimore to
Wheeling, sixteen days; from Wheeling to Shawneetown,
thirty-eight days; from Shawneetown to the Birkbeck
settlement, four days.<note place='foot'>Woods, <q>Residence in Illinois,</q> 33,
74, 111, 131, 133, 143-4.</note> A traveler in Illinois, in 1819, said
that the usual price of land carriage was fifty cents per
hundred pounds for each twenty miles; sometimes higher,
never lower, and that it would not pay to have corn transported
twenty miles.<note place='foot'>Faux, <q>Memorable Days in Am.,</q>
315.</note> In 1820, the charge for carrying
either baggage or persons from Baltimore to Wheeling was
reported as from five to seven dollars per hundred weight.
Persons wishing to travel cheaply had their luggage transported
while they walked.<note place='foot'>Kingdom, <q>Am.
and the British Colonies,</q> 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
In 1823 the following passenger rates, by steamboat,
were quoted: From Cincinnati to New Orleans, $25.00; to
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
Louisville, $4.00; to Pittsburg, $15.00; to Wheeling, $14.00;
from New Orleans to Cincinnati, $50.00; from Louisville to
Cincinnati, $6.00; from Pittsburg to Cincinnati, $12.00;
from Wheeling to Cincinnati, $10.00. The time quoted
for passage up stream was never less than twice that for
passage down stream.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q> XXV.,
95.</note> Early in 1825 the <hi rend='italic'>Louisiana Gazette</hi>
(presumably of New Orleans) reported that a steamboat
had made the 2200 miles from Pittsburg in sixteen days,<note place='foot'><q>Cincinnati
Emporium,</q> Feb. 3, 1825.</note>
and a few weeks later another steamer arrived at Shippingport,
at the Falls of the Ohio about two miles below Louisville,
thirteen days from New Orleans, this time including
three days detention from the breaking of a crank.<note place='foot'><q>Cincinnati
Gazette,</q> Apr. 1, 1825.</note> Rates
quoted in 1826, per one hundred pounds, were: From
Pittsburg to St. Louis, in keel-boats, $1.62-½; to Nashville,
$1.50; to Louisville, $0.75; to Cincinnati, $0.62-½; to
Maysville, $0.50; to Marietta, $0.40; to Wheeling, $0.18-3/4;
in wagons, from Pittsburg to Philadelphia, $1.00 to $1.12-½;
from Philadelphia to Pittsburg, $3.00; from Philadelphia
to Wheeling, $3.50.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXXI., 58.</note> A Columbus, Ohio, editor declared
that it required thirty days and cost $5.00 per hundred to
transport goods from Philadelphia to Columbus, while it
required but twenty days and $2.50 to transport from
New York.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
XXXI., 38.</note> No explanation was given, but the most
probable one is the opening of the Erie Canal. Illinois
buyers could, of course, take advantage of the cheaper rate
as well as the inhabitants of Columbus. The freight
schedule agreed upon by the owners, masters, and agents
of steamboats in July, 1830, was, per 100 pounds, as
follows: Pittsburg to Cincinnati, $0.45; Pittsburg to Louisville,
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
$0.50; Wheeling to Cincinnati, $0.40; Wheeling to
Louisville, $0.45; Cincinnati to Louisville, $0.12-½; in the
reverse direction rates were the same, except that the rate
from Louisville to Cincinnati was $0.16. Freight on pork,
from Cincinnati to Louisville was $0.20 per barrel, and on
flour and light (probably meaning empty) barrels, $0.15
per barrel. The schedule rates were not, however, generally
adhered to, many boats carrying freight at from 2-½
to 5 cents lower than the quoted rate.<note place='foot'><q>Cincinnati Christian
Journal and Intelligencer,</q> July 27, 1830.</note> At this time there
were 213 steamboats in use in western waters&mdash;an increase
of about three-fold since 1820.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXXVIII., 97.</note> Improved transportation
caused a better market price for produce in the West. In
1819, at Cincinnati, flour sold at $1.37-½ per barrel, corn
at from $0.10 to $0.12 per bushel, and pork at $0.10-½
per pound,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XLIV.,
36.</note> while in 1830, in the same market, flour from
wagons sold at $2.65 per barrel, or from store at $3.00;
corn at $0.18 to $0.20, and pork at $0.05 per pound ($10.00
to $10.50 per barrel).<note place='foot'><q>Cincinnati Christian Journal
and Intelligencer,</q> July 27, 1830.</note> The influence of improved transportation
on emigration is obvious. In regard to steamboat
navigation it should be noted that in 1817 rates up-stream
were more than three times as high as rates down-stream,
in 1823 the former were less than twice the latter,
and in 1830 the two were about equal. During the same
period the time of up-stream passage was diminished
more than one-half. Steamboats had not driven out the
ruder crafts, but more and more use was being made of the
more expeditious means of transportation, and its effect on
the future economic activity of the West could already be
seen.
</p>

<p>
Naturally the difference in price of the same commodity
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
in two different markets was dependent in large measure
on the ease or difficulty of transportation. In the latter
part of 1817, corn was $0.24 to $0.30 and wheat $0.75, in
Illinois, while corn was $0.50 and wheat $0.75 at Cincinnati.<note place='foot'>Fearon,
<q>Sketches of Am.,</q> 217, 260. Reprinted in Kingdom, <q>Am.
and the British Colonies,</q> 55, 62.</note>
In 1825 wheat was worth hardly $0.25 per
bushel, while it sold for $0.80 to $0.87-½ in Petersburg,
Virginia, and flour was $6.00 per barrel at Charleston,
South Carolina, and was scarce even at that price in
Nashville, Tennessee. At the same time corn sold for
from $0.08 to $0.10 in Illinois, and for $1.75 to $2.00 in
Petersburg, Virginia.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXIX., 165; <q>The Intelligencer</q> Petersburg, Va.,
Mar. 11, 1825; <q>Charleston (S. C.) Mercury,</q> May 25, 1825; <q>Nashville
(Tenn.) Republican,</q> Apr. 16, 1825.</note> In 1826 wheat sold in Illinois at
$0.37-½, and in England at $2.00 (nine shillings).<note place='foot'><q>Niles'
Register,</q> XXXI., 52.</note> In 1829
flour was scarce at Galena. A supply from the more
southern settlements in Illinois sold at $8.00 per barrel,
and the farmers were urged to bring more.<note place='foot'><q>Miners'
Journal,</q> Galena, Oct. 4, 1829.</note> This was in
October. In November flour was quoted at Galena at
$9.00 to $10.00 per barrel, while it sold at St. Louis for
$4.50 to $5.50. In December, Cincinnati flour was from
$10.00 to $10.50 and Illinois flour from $8.00 to $8.50, at
Galena, whereas in the succeeding August they were $5.00
and $4.00, respectively. In November, 1829, the one
article of food that was quoted as cheaper at Galena than
at St. Louis was potatoes. They were $0.25 per bushel, at
Galena, and from $0.37-½ to $0.50 at St. Louis. Butter
was $0.25 to $0.37-½ at Galena, and $0.12-½ to $0.20
at St. Louis; corn, $0.50 at Galena, and $0.25 to $0.31 at
St. Louis; beef, $0.03-½ to $0.04-½ at Galena, and $0.01-½
to $0.02 at St. Louis; whisky, $0.62-½ per gallon at Galena,
and $0.30 to $0.33 at St. Louis.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
Nov. 3, 1829; Dec. 15, 1829; Aug. 14, 1830.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Life of the People.</head>

<p>
Of the 13,635 persons who were following some occupation
in Illinois in 1820, nearly 91 per cent (12,395) were
engaged in agriculture.<note place='foot'><q>Twelfth Census of the U.
S., Occupations,</q> p. xxx.</note> To this pursuit the state was
naturally well adapted. One of the most observant of
German travelers in America wrote that the meaning of
<q>fertile land</q> was very different in this region from its
meaning in Germany. In America fertile land of the first
class required no fertilizer for the first century and was too
rich for wheat during the first decade, while fertile land of
the second class needed no fertilizer during the first twelve
to twenty years of its cultivation. Bottom-lands belonged
to the first class.<note place='foot'>Duden, <q>Nordamerika,</q>
61.</note> The prairies remained unappreciated
by the Americans, although some foreign farmers preferred
to settle in Illinois, because there they could avoid having
to clear land, and could raise a crop the first year, while
coal could serve as fuel,<note place='foot'>Hecke, <q>Reise
durch die Vereinigten Staaten,</q> II., 134-5.</note> and a ditch and bank fence,
requiring little wood, could be constructed, or a hedge
could be grown.<note place='foot'>The following describes a ditch and
bank fence: <q>I very much admire
Mr. Birkbeck's mode of <hi rend='italic'>fencing</hi>.
He makes a ditch 4 ft. wide at top, sloping
to 1 ft. wide at bottom, and 4 ft. deep. With the earth that comes out of the
ditch he makes a bank on one side, which is turfed towards the ditch. Then
a long pole is put up from the bottom of the ditch to 2 ft. above the bank; this
is crossed by a short pole from the other side, and then a rail is laid along
between the forks. The banks were growing beautifully, and looked altogether
very neat as well as formidable, though a live hedge (which he intends
to have) instead of dead poles and rails, upon top, would make the fence far
more effectual as well as handsomer.</q>&mdash;Hulme, in Cobbett, <q>Year's Residence
in the U. S.,</q> 282.</note> A traveler of 1819 speaks of one of the
largest prairies as not well adapted to cultivation, because
of the scarcity of wood, and in the fall of 1825 there was
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
but one house on the way from Paris to Springfield, leading
across eighty miles of a prairie ninety miles in length.<note place='foot'>Ernst
in <q>Pub. No. 8 of the Ill. State Hist. Lib.,</q> 156; <q>Jacksonville
(Ill.) Weekly Journal,</q> Apr. 18, 1877 (in <q>Ill. Local Hist.,</q> III., in Wis.
Hist. Soc. Lib.)</note>
</p>

<p>
It was easy to obtain land. After 1820 it could be
bought from the government of the United States at $1.25
per acre, it could be rented&mdash;sometimes for one peck of
corn per acre per year<note place='foot'>Faux, <q>Memorable Days
in Am.,</q> 213.</note>&mdash;, or the claim of a squatter could
be purchased. When Peter Cartwright moved from Kentucky
to Illinois in 1824, he gave as reasons for moving
the fact that he had six children and but one hundred and
fifty acres of land, and that Kentucky land was high and
rising in value; the increase of a disposition in the South
to justify slavery; the distinction in Kentucky between
young people reared without working and those who
worked; the danger that his four daughters might marry
into slave families; and the need of preachers in the new
country.<note place='foot'>Strickland, <q>Autobiography of Peter
Cartwright,</q> 244.</note> The land being obtained, the first cultivation
was difficult. Writers often give the idea that after a year
or two the land which had been heavily timbered was left
free from trees, stumps, or roots, but many a pioneer
plowed for twenty years among the stumps. Stump fields
are today no novelty in Illinois, and farming has not retrograded.
Usually the settler's first need was a crop, and in
order to hasten its production the trees were girdled, a
process which might either precede or follow the planting,
according to the time of year in which the immigrant
arrived. If prairie land was plowed six horses, or their
equivalent of power in oxen, were required for the first
breaking, and a summer's fallow usually followed in order
to allow the roots to decay. In 1819 five dollars per acre
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
was paid for the first plowing of the prairie, and three or
four dollars for the second.<note place='foot'>Faux,
<q>Memorable Days in Am.,</q> 273.</note>
</p>

<p>
Agricultural products exhibited considerable variety,
although corn was the chief article raised, because it
furnished food for man and beast, it gave a large yield,
and it was more easily harvested than wheat. Wheat was
raised without any great degree of care as to its culture,
being frequently sowed upon ground that was poorly prepared,
and being threshed in a most wasteful manner. Both
wheat and flour were exported. Flour-mills, often of a
rude sort, were found at inconveniently long distances
from each other. Ferdinand Ernst, traveling in 1819,
found a turbine wheel at the mill of Mr. Jarrott, a few
miles from St. Louis, and mentioned the fact as a peculiar
feature.<note place='foot'>Ernst, in <q>Pub. No. 8 of the
Ill. State Hist. Lib.,</q> 155.</note> Some of the settlers in Sangamon county had
to go sixty miles to mill in 1824.<note place='foot'>Strickland,
<q>Autobiography of Peter Cartwright,</q> 254.</note> In 1830 the first flour
mill in northern Illinois was erected on Fox River. It was
operated by the same power that ran a saw-mill, and the
millstones were boulders, laboriously dressed by hand.<note place='foot'>Chapman,
Lyde Grove, in <q>Stories of the Pioneer Mothers of Ill.,</q> in
MSS. in Ill. State Hist. Lib.</note>
Tobacco of excellent quality was grown, and sometimes
formed an article of export.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXIX., 37; <q>Ill. Monthly Mag.,</q> I., 127.</note> Cotton was an important
article for home consumption. In the early years of the
state hopes were entertained that cotton might become an
article of export, but it was found that the crop required
so much labor as to make raising it in large quantities
unprofitable. It was after 1830, however, that it ceased
to be cultivated in the state. It was raised at least as far
north as the present Danville, about one hundred and
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
twenty-five miles south of Chicago.<note place='foot'><q>Niles'
Register,</q> XXII., 2, 67, 245, 386; <q>Ill. Monthly Mag.,</q> I., 129;
Loomis, <q>Journey to the Great West in 1825,</q> ch. iv., pages
unnumbered.</note> A woman whose
parents moved to Sangamon county in 1819 says that
when in that county they raised, picked, spun, and wove
their own cotton. The children had to seed the cotton
before the fire in the long winter evenings. The importance
of cotton as a factor in inducing immigration may
have been considerable.<note place='foot'><q>Stories of the Pioneer Mothers
of Ill.,</q> in MSS. in Ill. State Hist. Lib.</note> Large quantities of castor oil
were made in the state from home-grown castor beans.<note place='foot'><q>Niles'
Register,</q> XXX., 287; <q>Ill. Intelligencer,</q> May 18, 1826.</note>
Vegetables were large, although not always of good flavor.<note place='foot'><q>Ill.
Monthly Mag.,</q> I., 129.</note>
Peaches, apples, pears, quinces and cherries were cultivated
successfully, while grapes, plums, crabapples, persimmons,
mulberries, strawberries, raspberries and blackberries
grew wild.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
I., 128-9</note> An agricultural society was formed in
1819, a chief purpose being to rid the state of stagnant
water.<note place='foot'>Fearon, <q>Sketches of America,</q> 1817, 261, reprinted in
Kingdom, <q>Am. and the British Colonies,</q> 63; Birkbeck, <q>Letters from Ill.</q> 22,
32-3, 51-2, 69, 78, 85; Birkbeck, <q>Extracts,</q> 24-5, shows that a honey-locust
hedge could be made (1819) for less than 12 cents per rod.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is not easy to exaggerate the simplicity of the farming
of pioneer times. When one reads that in 1817 a log
cabin of two rooms could be built for from $50.00 to
$70.00; a frame house, ten by fourteen feet, for $575.00 to
$665.00; a log kitchen for $31.00 to $35.50; a log stable
for $31.00 to $40.00; a barn for $80.00 to $97.75; a fence
for $0.25 per rod, and a prairie ditch for $0.29 to $0.44 per
rod; that a strong wagon cost $160.00; that a log house,
eighteen by sixteen feet, was made by contract for $20,
and ceiled and floored with sawn boards for $10 more;
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
that a cow and calf cost $12.00 to $16.00, and a breeding
sow, $2.00 or $3.00; that laborers received $0.75 per day
without board, and a man and two horses $1.00 per day;
and that various other useful articles could be procured at
certain prices, care is needed in order to avoid the conclusion
that an immigrant must have had several dollars, if
not a few hundreds of them. This need for care is increased
by the fact that the most detailed statistical data for early
Illinois is given by Birkbeck or his visitors, and is applicable
to the English settlement in Edwards county&mdash;a
settlement with enough unique features to make the data
almost more of an obstacle than a help. As a matter of
fact, many immigrants before 1820 had only enough money
to make the first payment on their land ($80.00), or after
July 1, 1820, only enough to buy the minimum tract
offered for sale ($100.00), while in both periods hundreds had
not even as much money as $80.00 or $100.00, and had to
become squatters. A log house, and practically all of the
first houses were of logs, was usually built without the
expenditure of one cent in cash, being erected by the
family which was to occupy it, or, if neighbors were within
reach, on the <q>frolic</q> system. Ceilings and floors were
both rare, and if a floor existed it was usually made of
puncheons. The number of pioneers who actually paid
as much as $31.00 for a log stable must have been small
indeed. First fences were often of brush, or brush and
logs, and many times crops were raised unfenced. Territorial
laws prohibited allowing stock to run at large during
the crop season. An immigrant often brought his cow and
sow, and if not he either did without, which in the latter
case was small privation in a region almost crowded with
game, or secured the desired animals by barter or by
working for a few days. Men frequently traded work, but
the payment of cash wages was rare, the cheapness of
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
land and the ease of securing a living leaving small
inducement to anyone to become a day laborer;<note place='foot'>Birkbeck,
<q>Jour. from Va. to Ill.,</q> 36; Duden, <q>Nordamerika,</q> 319.</note> while
for the same reason those who were professional laborers
were often of an undesirable type.<note place='foot'>Faux, <q>Memorable
Days in Am.,</q> 315.</note> Foreigners were sometimes
shocked at the utter carelessness of Illinois farmers.
A soil of great fertility, a region so abundantly supplied
with game and wild products as to make it almost possible
to live from the forest alone, combined with a lack of
efficient means of transportation, made such a temptation
to a life of idle ease as many pioneers did not resist. Be
it remembered, also, that although towns, retail trade,
and export trade had begun in Illinois by 1830, these
changes were not simultaneous throughout the state. As
1830 closed Illinois still had squatters many miles from a
mill, it still had Indians, it still had unbridged streams, it
still had regions far from a market&mdash;in a word, it had still
persisting in some part of its wide extent each of the ills
that had at various times confronted it in respect to
personal danger and lack of inducements to farmers. The
minority of really progressive farmers overcame the difficulties
confronting them by raising cattle or hogs and
driving them to distant markets, the price received being
almost clear profit, or by constructing their own boats and
shipping their produce.<note place='foot'>Birkbeck, <q>Letters from Ill.,</q> 35-6.</note>
</p>

<p>
Although the great majority of the population of Illinois
was engaged in agriculture, there were salt works in the
southeast and lead mines in the northwest. The salt
industry was important. Far the greater part of the salt
made in the state was made at the Gallatin county saline,
near Shawneetown. In 1819 the indefinite statement was
made that these springs furnished between 200,000 and
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
300,000 bushels of salt annually, the salt being sold at the
works at from fifty to seventy-five cents per bushel.<note place='foot'>Mackenzie,
<q>View of the U. S.,</q> 1819, 298.</note> In
1822, the price of salt in Illinois was reported to have
fallen from $1.25 to $0.50, because of the discovery of
copious and strong salt wells.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXII., 112.</note> The next year a strong well was
reported twenty miles east of Carlyle.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
XXV., 272.</note> In 1825,
a visitor to the Vermilion county saline found twenty
kettles in operation, producing about one hundred bushels
of salt per week.<note place='foot'>Loomis, <q>Notes of a
Journey to the Great West in 1825,</q> ch. iv, pages
unnumbered.</note> In 1828, an official report of the superintendent
of the Gallatin county saline stated that about
100,000 bushels of salt was made annually, and sold at
from $0.30 to $0.50 per bushel. The lessees paid $2,160.50
rent during the year.<note place='foot'><q>H. J.</q> (Ill.),
1828-29, 63.</note> In 1830, the salt works in Gallatin
county had a capital of $50,000; a product of from 100,000
to 130,000 bushels, selling at from $0.40 to $0.50; and three
hundred employees. The saline in Vermilion county had
a capital of $3500; a product of 3000 to 4000 bushels,
selling at $1.25 to $1.50 per bushel; and eight employees.
The works in Jackson county produced 3000 to 4000
bushels, selling at $0.75 to $1.00; and had from six to
eight employees. The difference in price is noteworthy as
indicating what must have been the difficulty of transporting
salt from Gallatin county to either Vermilion or Jackson
counties. At the Gallatin county works fuel was becoming
scarce and water had to be carried some distance in pipes,
thus increasing the cost of production. At the springs in
Indiana salt was $1.25 per bushel, and in Kentucky it was
$0.50 to $1.00. The states of New York, Virginia, Massachusetts
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
and Ohio, respectively, produced more salt than
did Illinois.<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q> No. 55,
21st Cong., 1st Sess., Vol. III.; <q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXVIII., 161.</note>
</p>

<p>
The lead industry at Galena was still in its infancy,
notwithstanding the fact that the richness of the mines
was early known.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q> XXII.,
226.</note> In 1822, a number of persons went to
Galena from Sangamon county.<note place='foot'>Parkison, <q>Pioneer Life
in Wis.,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> II., 328-9.</note> For some years it was
a common practice to go to the mines in the summer and
return to the older settlements for the winter.<note place='foot'>Owen,
<q>Ums Jahr 1819 und 1829,</q> in <q>Deutsch-Amerikanische Geschichtsblatter,</q>
Jahrgang 2, Heft 2, S. 42.</note> The population
of Galena was 74 in August, 1823;<note place='foot'>Meeker, <q>Early
Hist. of the Lead Region,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q>
VI., 280.</note> about 100 on
July 1, 1825; 151 on December 31, 1825; 194 on March
31, 1826; 406 on June 30, 1826;<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q>
IV, 800.</note> and 1000 to 1500 in
1829.<note place='foot'><q>Narrative of Morgan L. Martin,</q> in <q>Wis.
Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> XL, 398.</note> In 1826 a part of Lord Selkirk's French-Swiss
colony on the Red River moved to Galena and became
farmers in that region.<note place='foot'>Chetlain, <q>Recollections of
Seventy Years,</q> 6; Mrs. Adile Gratiot, in
<q>Early Ill. Towns,</q> Lib. of Chicago Hist. Soc.</note>
The rush to the lead region began
in 1826 and became intense in the next year.<note place='foot'>Parkison,
<q>Pioneer Life in Wis,</q> in <q>Wis. Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> II., 329.</note> In 1827, a
rude log hut, sixteen by twenty feet, rented for $35.00 per
month. Galena had then about two hundred log houses,<note place='foot'><q>Ex.
Doc.,</q> No. 277, 20th Cong., 1st Sess., Vol. VII.</note>
and in the same year the first framed house was raised.<note place='foot'><q>Shattuck
Memorials,</q> 233-4.</note>
In July, 1828, five hundred lead miners were wanted at
$17.00 to $25.00 and board per month.<note place='foot'><q>Niles'
Register,</q> XXXIV., 344.</note>
</p>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<p>
A pursuit that was once common and profitable is
described by a lawyer who traveled the first Illinois circuit,
consisting of the counties of Greene, Sangamon, Peoria,
Fulton, Schuyler, Adams, Pike and Calhoun, in 1827, as
follows: <q>On this circuit we found but little business in
any of the counties&mdash;parties, jurymen and witnesses were
reported in all the counties after Peoria, as being absent
bee and deer hunting&mdash;a business that was then profitable,
as well as necessary to the sustenance of families during
the winter.</q><note place='foot'><q>Jacksonville (Ill.) Weekly
Journal,</q> Apr. 18, 1877.</note>
</p>

<p>
Not until after 1830 was a common school system with
effective provision for its support established, although
subscription schools existed some years before the close of
the eighteenth century. Instruction given in the earliest
schools was slight, and in 1818 a most competent observer
declared that he believed that in Missouri <q>at least one-third
of the schools were really a public nuisance, and did
the people more harm than good; another third about
balanced the account, by doing about as much harm as
good; and perhaps one-third were advantageous to the
community in various degrees. Not a few drunken, profane,
worthless Irishmen were perambulating the country,
and getting up schools; and yet they could neither speak,
read, pronounce, spell, or write the English language.</q><note place='foot'>Babcock,
<q>Memoir of John Mason Peck,</q> 123.</note>
These schools closely resembled those of Illinois. Schoolbooks
were rare and children carried to school whatever
book they chanced to have, the Old Testament with its
long proper names sometimes serving in lieu of a chart or
primer.<note place='foot'>Peck, <q><q>Father Clark</q>; or,
The Pioneer Preacher,</q> 240.</note> In some schools pupils studied aloud. Reading,
writing, spelling and arithmetic were the only branches
commonly taught, although as early as 1806 surveying was
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
taught in a <q>seminary</q> near the present Belleville.<note place='foot'>Reynolds,
<q>Illinois&mdash;My Own Times,</q> 59.</note> In
1827 Rock Spring Seminary, now Shortleff College, was
opened by Baptists, and the following year instruction was
begun in what was to become McKendree College (Methodist).<note place='foot'>Babcock,
<q>Memoir of John Mason Peck,</q> 229.</note>
The teacher of the first school in McLean county
(1825) received $2.50 per pupil for the term of four
months.<note place='foot'><q>Trans. of the McLean Co. (Ill.)
Hist. Soc,</q> II., 19.</note> The next year a teacher in Jacksonville was to
be paid in cash or produce, or in pork, cattle, or hogs at
cash prices, and to pay board in similar commodities at
the rate of one dollar per week. This included washing,
fuel and lights. School was open ten, and often twelve,
hours per day.<note place='foot'><q>Jacksonville (Ill.)
Weekly Journal,</q> Apr. 18, 1877.</note>
</p>

<p>
Religious societies were early organized, but the building
of churches was not then common. In 1796 a Baptist
society was organized, and previous to this time both
Baptists and Methodists, without organized societies, had
united in holding prayer-meetings in which the Bible
and published sermons were read, prayers offered, and
hymns sung.<note place='foot'>Peck, in Reynolds, <q>Pioneer Hist. of
Ill.,</q> 259.</note> Before the close of the century the Methodists
organized. The Presbyterians were prominent in
the early years of statehood, but in 1818 they were just
beginning their work in Illinois.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
272-3.</note> Meetings were usually
held in private houses until such time as the congregation
felt that a church building should be erected, or at least
until some one felt the need, for the first church was
sometimes built by a few individuals.<note place='foot'>Strickland,
<q>Autobiography of Peter Cartwright,</q> 386-7.</note> Ministers were of
two types&mdash;those who devoted all of their time to religious
work and traveled over large areas, and those who
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
combined ministerial duties with farming, hunting, or
some other frontier occupation. Neither class received
much money. Peter Cartwright, one of the most famous
pioneer preachers, received $40 one year (1824-25) and
$60 the next&mdash;and this he considered good wages.<note place='foot'>Strickland,
<q>Autobiography of Peter Cartwright,</q> 254.</note>
Pioneer energy was displayed in the overcoming of
difficulties. For more than ten years the Baptists held
meetings on alternate months at two places thirty-six
miles apart, and several families regularly traveled that
distance to the two-days' meeting, even in unfavorable weather&mdash;and
this, too, after Illinois had become a state.<note place='foot'>Babcock,
<q>Memoir of John M. Peck,</q> 96-7.</note>
In 1829, the Presbyterians, true to their missionary spirit,
occupied the extreme frontier at Galena.<note place='foot'>Reynolds,
<q>Illinois&mdash;My Own Times,</q> 128.</note> Catholicism
increased but slowly.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
116-7.</note> Divisions such as were found in
the East or South reached Illinois, and at one time the
Baptists were divided into three factions, which had about
the same kind of fraternal relations as the Jews and the
Samaritans. The chief questions for contention were
whether or not missionaries should be sent out by the
church and whether fellowship with slaveholders should
be maintained.<note place='foot'>Babcock, <q>Memoir of John
M. Peck,</q> 94-5.</note> An association of anti-slavery Baptists
was formed, as also Bible societies and temperance
societies.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
183, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, 203, 209.
</p>
<p>
In general, on the subject of religion in early Illinois, see: Peck, in Reynolds,
<q>Pioneer Hist, of Ill.,</q> 253-75, and the above mentioned works.</p></note>
Camp-meetings, with their well-known phenomena,
were common in the early years of statehood, and it is no
reflection upon their value to say that they were one of
the chief diversions for the pioneers.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Slavery in Illinois As Affecting
Settlement.</head>

<p>
Slavery, as well as indentured servitude, existed in
Illinois as late as 1845,<note place='foot'>Harris, <q>Negro
Servitude in Ill.,</q> 116-9, note 3, p. 118.</note> and the <q>Black Laws</q> of the
state were repealed on February 7, 1865.<note place='foot'><q>Public
Laws</q> (Ill.). 1865, 105.</note> From 1787
until years after 1830 the slavery question was an unsettled
one. In addition to the arguments for or against the
institution that were used everywhere, the pro-slavery
party in Illinois asserted that as the Ordinance of 1787
guaranteed to the French inhabitants their property, the
French could hold slaves, and that as all citizens of a state
had equal rights other persons in Illinois could hold
slaves. The reply was that the Ordinance plainly forbade
slavery.<note place='foot'>The question of the binding
effect of the Ordinance received much attention,
especially from state courts, but early petitions show that the discussion
was not early important. In general, see Haight, <q>Ordinance of 1787,</q> in
<q>Mich. Pol. Sci. Ass'n Pub.,</q> II., 343-402; Cooley, <q>Michigan,</q> 137-9;
Washburne, <q>Sketch of Edward Coles,</q> 67-71.</note>
</p>

<p>
Whatever the merits of the argument, slavery did exist
in Illinois. The fear of the French that they might lose
their slaves, and the desire to attract slaveholders to
Illinois, led to determined and repeated efforts to legalize
slavery. Early in 1796 a petition was sent from Kaskaskia
to Congress, praying that the anti-slavery article in the
Ordinance of 1787 might be either repealed or so altered
as to permit the introduction of slaves from the original
states or elsewhere into the country of Illinois, that a law
might be enacted permitting the introduction of such
slaves as servants for life, and that it might be declared
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
for what period the children of such servants should serve
the masters of their parents. This petition was signed by
four men, including some of the largest landowners in Illinois,
but as the petition, while purporting to come from
Illinois alone, concerned the entire Northwest Territory, as
there was no indication that the four petitioners represented
Illinois sentiment, and as the congressional committee was
informed that many of the inhabitants of the territory did
not desire the proposed change, the prayer of the petition
was denied.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q> I., 68-9;
<q>Ind. Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 447-52, 452-5.</note>
</p>

<p>
In 1800, two hundred and sixty-eight inhabitants of
Illinois, chiefly French, petitioned Congress to repeal the
anti-slavery provision of the Ordinance, stating that many
of the inhabitants were crossing the Mississippi with their
slaves. The petition was not considered.<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist.
Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 455-61; <q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 6th Cong., 735.</note> A similar
request, presented late in 1802, was twice reported upon
by committees, one report (Randolph's) declaring that the
growth of Ohio proved that a lack of slavery would not
seriously retard settlement, while the other was in favor of
suspending the anti-slavery article for ten years, the male
descendants of immigrating slaves to be free at the age of
twenty-five years, and the females at twenty-one.<note place='foot'><q>Ind.
Hist. Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 461-70; <q>A. S. P. Misc.,</q> I., 387; <q>Annals
of Cong.,</q> 8th Cong., 1st Sess., 1023-4; <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>,
9th Cong., 1st Sess., 466-8.</note> In
1805 a majority of the members of the respective houses
of the Indiana legislature petitioned for the repeal of the
anti-slavery article, and this petition was closely followed
by a memorial from Illinois expressing the hope that the
general government would not pass unnoticed the act of
the last legislature authorizing the importation of slaves
into the territory. It violated the Ordinance, the memorialists
declared, and although they desired slavery they
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
professed themselves to be law-abiding.<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist.
Soc. Pub.,</q> II., 476-83, 498-506.</note> A committee
report on the petition and memorial recommended that
permission to import slaves into Indiana (then including
Illinois) for ten years be granted, in order that the evil
effects of slavery might be mitigated by its dispersion, but
no legislation resulted from the report,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
II., 494-7; <q>A. S. P., Misc.,</q> I., 450; <q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 9th
Cong., 1st Sess., 293, 466-8.</note> and the next year
petitioning was resumed. The legislature sent resolutions
asking for the suspension of the anti-slavery article, and
elaborating the argument for such suspension. A committee
of which the territorial delegate from Indiana was
chairman, presented a favorable report.<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist. Soc.
Pub.,</q> II., 507-10; <q>A. S. P., Misc.,</q> I., 467, 477;
<q>Annals of Cong.,</q> 9th Cong., 2d Sess., 375, 482.</note>
</p>

<p>
In September, 1807, a petition for the suspension of the
anti-slavery article was sent to Congress from the Indiana
legislature. It was signed by Jesse B. Thomas, later
author of the Missouri Compromise, but then Speaker of
the territorial House of Representatives, and resident in
what was to become the State of Indiana, and by the
president <hi rend='italic'>pro tem.</hi> of the Legislative Council. Action in
committee was adverse,<note place='foot'><q>Ind. Hist. Soc.
Pub.,</q> II., 515-21; <q>A. S. P., Misc.,</q> I., 484; <q>Annals
of Cong.,</q> 10th Cong., 1st Sess., 23, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>,
816.</note> Congress being then busied with
the question of the abolition of the slave trade.
</p>

<p>
During the territorial period in Illinois (1809-1818), the
slavery question was not much agitated. The Constitution
of 1818 provided that slaves could not be thereafter brought
into the State, except such as should be brought under
contract to labor at the Saline Creek salt works, said contract
to be limited to one year, although renewable, and
the proviso to be void after 1825, but existing slavery was
not abolished, and existing indentures&mdash;and some were
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
for ninety-nine years<note place='foot'>Harris, <q>Negro Servitude
in Ill.,</q> 11, note 3.</note>&mdash;should be carried out. Male
children of slaves or indentured servants should be free at
the age of twenty-one and females at eighteen.<note place='foot'>Poore,
<q>Charters and Constitutions,</q> Pt. I., 445-6.</note> In Congress,
as has been seen, Tallmadge, of New York, objected
to admitting Illinois before she abolished slavery, but his
objection was ineffectual.
</p>

<p>
In March, 1819, a slave code was enacted. Any black
or mulatto coming into the State was required to file with
the clerk of a circuit court a certificate of freedom. Slaves
should not be brought into the state for the purpose of
emancipation. Resident negroes, other than slaves and
indentured servants, must file certificates of freedom.
Slaves were to be whipped instead of fined, thirty-nine
stripes being the maximum number that might be inflicted.
Contracts with slaves were void. Not more than two
slaves should meet together without written permission
from their masters. Any master emancipating his slaves
must give a bond of $1000 per head that such emancipated
slaves should not become public charges, failure to give
such a bond being punishable by a fine of $200 per head.
Colored people must present passes when traveling.<note place='foot'><q>Revised
Laws of Ill.,</q> 1833, 457-62.</note>
</p>

<p>
Stringent as was the code of 1819, it was of a type
that was common in the slave states. Its passage may
have kept some negroes, both free and slave, from coming
into the state upon their own initiative without certificates
of freedom. From 1810 to 1820 the number of slaves in
Illinois increased from 168 to 917, Illinois being the only
state north of Mason and Dixon's line having an increase
in the number of slaves during the decade, although in
the Territory of Missouri, during this time, the number
increased from about 3000 to over 10,200. At the same
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
time the number of free blacks in Illinois decreased from
about 600 to some 450, while they increased in Indiana
from nearly 400 to over 1200. Of the slaves in Illinois in
1820 precisely 500 were in the counties of Gallatin and
Randolph, the former being the center of the salt-making
industry, and the latter the seat of the early French settlement
at Kaskaskia.<note place='foot'><q>Ninth Census of
U. S., Population and Social Statistics,</q> 5, 7, 24-5;
Melish, <q>Geog. Desc. of the U. S.,</q> 1822, 359.</note>
</p>

<p>
Whether the anti-slavery clause of the Ordinance of
1787 freed the slaves of the old French settlers was long a
disputed question, and it is certain that a strict construction
of the Illinois Constitution of 1818 made further
importation of slaves illegal. Many slave-owners passed
through southern Illinois to Missouri, because the main
road for emigration by land to that territory crossed the
Ohio River at Shawneetown. Many of the slaves who
produced the large increase in the number of slaves in
Missouri from 1810 to 1820 must have gone over this route.
In 1820 more than one-seventh of the population of
Missouri was slave.<note place='foot'><q>Ninth Census of U. S.,
Population and Social Statistics,</q> 3, 7.</note> The people of Illinois could not fail
to see that they were losing a certain class of emigrants&mdash;the
prosperous slaveholders. The loss became greater as
the likelihood of Missouri's admittance as a slave state
increased. As early as 1820 there was a rumor of the
formation of a party in Illinois to introduce slavery into
the state in a legal manner.<note place='foot'>J. Q. Adams,
<q>Memoirs,</q> V., 9.</note> The next year an editorial
in a leading newspaper of Illinois said: <q>Will the
admission of slavery in a new state tend to increase its
population?&mdash;is a question which has been of late much
discussed both within and without this state. It has been
contended that its admission would induce the emigration
of citizens of states as well where slavery was, as where it
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
was not tolerated&mdash;that while it would attract the attention
of the wealthy southern planter, it would not deter the
industrious northern farmer.</q> The editor cites Ohio and
Kentucky as proof against the above argument. In 1810
Ohio had a population, in round numbers, of 230,700 and
Kentucky one of 406,500; in 1820 Ohio had 581,400, while
Kentucky had 563,300, giving a difference in favor of Ohio
of over 18,000; and an excess of gain during the decade,
in favor of Ohio, of 93,847. <q>We are willing to take
into consideration the unsettled titles of land in the last-mentioned
state [Kentucky], and admit that in this respect
Ohio had a decided advantage&mdash;we will therefore deduct
the fraction of 93,847, believing it equivalent to the loss of
population from this cause&mdash;there is still a difference of
100,000.</q><note place='foot'><q>Illinois Intelligencer</q> (Vandalia),
Apr. 24, 1821.</note> The editor's figures for 1810 were correct and
those for 1820 were approximately so. It is also true,
and in line with his argument, that during the same decade
Indiana showed an increase from 24,500 to 147,200, while
Missouri's increase was from 20,800 to 66,500; the
increase in Illinois being between the two in proportion of
increase&mdash;from 12,282 to 55,162.<note place='foot'><q>Ninth
Census of the U. S., Population and Social Statistics,</q> 3.</note> The passing of the
slaveholders to Missouri continued and the discussion of
the slavery question became animated.
</p>

<p>
In the gubernatorial election of 1822 there were four
candidates for governor, two being anti-slavery and two
pro-slavery in belief. Edward Coles, from Virginia, an
anti-slavery man, was elected by a plurality of but a few
votes. His election was due to a division in the ranks of
the opposite party, as is shown by the fact that the pro-slavery
party polled over 5300 votes, while the anti-slavery
party polled only some 3300.<note place='foot'>The vote
for governor given by W. H. Brown, <q>Early Movement in
Illinois for the Legalization of Slavery,</q> (<q>Fergus Hist. Ser.,</q> No. 4, p. 15),
differs from that by Washburne, <q>Sketch of Edward Coles,</q> 58, and Bonham,
<q>Fifty Years Recollections,</q> 22, while neither gives Coles a plurality of 46
votes, as Harris in <q>Negro Servitude in Ill.,</q> 31, says the official returns show
him to have received. For the purposes of this work the differences are so
slight as to be negligible.</note> In his message of December
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
5, 1822, Governor Coles strongly urged the passage of
a law to prevent kidnapping<note place='foot'><q>House Journal</q>
(Ill.), 1822-23, pp. 25-7; <q>Senate Journal</q> (Ill.),
1822-23, pp. 29-30.</note>&mdash;then a regular trade.
This was referred to a select committee which reported as
follows: <q>Your committee have carefully examined the
laws upon the subject, and with deep regret announce
their incapability of devising a more effectual plan than
the one already prescribed by law for the suppression of
such infamous crimes. It is believed that the benevolent
views of the executive and the benign purposes of the
statutes can only be realized by the redoubled diligence
of our grand juries and our magistrates, aided by the well-directed
support of all just and good men.</q><note place='foot'><q>Senate
Journal</q> (Ill.), 1822-23, pp. 43-6; <q>House Journal</q> (Ill.),
1822-23, pp. 68, 134, 147-8.</note> The legislature
was politically opposed to the governor, and the
committee's report sounds like the baldest irony. With
the report was presented a scheme for introducing slavery
into the state,<note place='foot'><q>House Journal</q> (Ill.),
1822-23, pp. 44, 45.</note> a scheme which eventually led to the vote
of 1824.<note place='foot'>Davidson and Stuvé, <q>Hist. of Ill.,</q> 320.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Constitution of Illinois provided that upon the vote
of two-thirds of the members of each house of the legislature,
the question of calling a convention for the revision
of the Constitution should be submitted to the people.
For calling a convention only a majority vote from the
people was necessary. This method of procedure the
pro-slavery party determined upon. The two-thirds in
favor of the project could be secured without difficulty in
the senate, but in the house the desperate expedient of
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
reconsidering the right of a member to a contested seat
and seating his opponent was resorted to.<note place='foot'><q>House
Journal</q> (Ill.), 1822-23, p. 272.</note> This being
done the resolution to submit the question of a constitutional
convention to the people was passed by a bare two-thirds
vote in each house.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1822-23,
P. 276; <q>Senate Journal</q> (Ill.), 1822-23, p. 252.</note> Of the eighteen men who
voted against the resolution, eleven were natives of southern
states, two of New York, two of Connecticut, one of Massachusetts,
one of Vermont, and one of Sweden. There
were some northern men who voted in favor of the resolution.<note place='foot'>Washburne,
<q>Sketch of Edward Coles,</q> <hi rend='italic'>passim.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The campaign resulting from the passage of the convention
resolution was waged for eighteen months with great
vigor. Press and pulpit were actively employed.<note place='foot'><q>Edwardsville
Spectator,</q> Jan. 27, 1824; Nov. 29, 1823.</note> A large
anti-slavery society was formed in Morgan county,<note place='foot'>Eames,
<q>Historic Morgan and Classic Jacksonville,</q> 12.</note> and
it was in all probability one of many such organizations.
In August, 1824, came the final vote, and the official count
of the votes showed a majority of 1668 against calling a
constitutional convention.<note place='foot'><p><q>House Journal</q> (Ill.),
1824-25, p. 64. The corrected official vote
(Aug. 2, 1824), by counties, is as follows:
</p>
<p>
For. Against.<lb/>
Alexander, 75, 51<lb/>
Bond, 63, 240<lb/>
Clark, 31, 116<lb/>
Crawford, 134, 262<lb/>
Edgar, 3, 234<lb/>
Edwards, 189, 391<lb/>
Fayette, 125, 121<lb/>
Franklin, 170, 113<lb/>
Fulton, 5, 60<lb/>
Gallatin, 597, 133<lb/>
Greene, 164, 379<lb/>
Hamilton, 173, 85<lb/>
Jackson, 180, 93<lb/>
Jefferson, 99, 43<lb/>
Johnson, 74, 74<lb/>
Lawrence, 158, 261<lb/>
Madison, 351, 563<lb/>
Marion, 45, 52<lb/>
Montgomery, 74, 90<lb/>
Monroe, 141, 196<lb/>
Morgan, 42, 432<lb/>
Pike, 19, 165<lb/>
Pope, 273, 124<lb/>
Randolph, 357, 284<lb/>
Sangamon, 153, 722<lb/>
St. Clair, 408, 506<lb/>
Union, 213, 240<lb/>
Washington, 112, 173<lb/>
Wayne, 189, 111<lb/>
White, 355, 326
</p>
<p>
Totals, 4972, 6640
</p>
<p>
The vote as here given is from Moses, <q>Illinois,</q> I., 324. It is also given in
Harris, <q>Negro Servitude in Illinois,</q> 48. It differs to a slight degree from
that given by William H. Brown in his <q>Historical Sketch of the Early
Movement in Illinois for the Legalization of Slavery,</q> read at the annual
meeting of the Chicago Hist. Soc., Dec. 5, 1864 (<q>Fergus Hist. Ser.,</q> No. 4),
and in Washburne, <q>Sketch of Edward Coles,</q> 191. Brown was one of the
leaders in the struggle and his work is of especial value. It is probable that
the vote appended to his address was prepared by some one else. The work
of Moses is of later date and his figures correspond to the official report in
respect to the majority against the convention, as the others do not.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>

<p>
It is noteworthy that in this struggle the governor of
the state was an anti-slavery southerner; eleven of the
eighteen anti-slavery men in the legislature were southern;
the pro-slavery party, which polled 1971 more votes
than its opponents in 1822, was defeated by 1668 votes in
1824. It is also true that of the leaders in the campaign
some of the most noted were southern anti-slavery or
northern pro-slavery men.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/illus-3.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <figDesc>Illustration: Election Results.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<p>
The history of settlement suggests several explanations
for the votes of 1822 and 1824. The legislature which
passed the convention resolution had not been chosen
with the avowed purpose of doing so. Some designing
politicians had such an object in view and secured the
election of pro-slavery men by anti-slavery constituents.
The number of such cases was not large, but as the resolution
passed by the minimum vote they are important.<note place='foot'>Brown,
<q>Early Movement in Illinois for the Legalization of Slavery,</q>
in <q>Fergus Hist. Series,</q> No. 4, pp. 16-17.</note>
In 1822, however, there was almost without doubt a pro-slavery
majority in the state, but it is improbable that
there was a two-thirds majority. In the election of 1822,
there were 8635 votes cast, while in that of 1824 there were
11,612 votes cast. This great increase indicates a large
immigration. Immigration at this time was largely to
the northern counties of the state, and it is a point of
prime significance that each of the seven northern counties
gave large majorities against the calling of the convention,
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
and that without the vote of these seven counties the vote
would have been 4523 for a convention and 4408 against a
convention, thus changing the decision of the state. This
vote of the northern counties can not be explained by an
increased immigration from the north, because no such
increase to any significant degree is discoverable. The
admission of Missouri as a slave state would naturally
lead pro-slavery emigrants to go to that state instead of
to Illinois. Another event which tended to influence the
vote in Illinois was the decision of Indiana against slavery,
in the summer of 1823, in the midst of the campaign in
Illinois.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q> XXV., 39;
<q>The Columbian Star</q> (Washington, D.
C.), Feb. 21, 1824.</note> The unjust action of the Illinois House of Representatives
in unseating an anti-convention member was
a powerful argument against the pro-slavery party.
</p>

<p>
In his message to the legislature, on November 16,
1824, Governor Coles said: <q rend='pre'>In the observations I had the
honor to make to the last Legislature, I recommended
that provision should be made for the abolition of the
remnant of African slavery which still existed in this
state. The full discussion of the principles and policy of
personal slavery, which has taken place since that period,
resulting in its rejection by the decided voice of the
people, still more imperiously makes it my duty to call
your attention in an especial manner to this subject, and
earnestly to entreat you to make just and equitable provision
for as speedy an abolition of this remnant of slavery,
as may be deemed consistent with the rights and claims of
the parties concerned.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In close connection with this subject, is my former
recommendation, to which I again solicit your attention,
that the law as it respects those held in service should be
rendered less severe, and more accordant with our political
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
institutions and local situation; and that more severe
penalties should be enacted against the unnatural crime of
kidnapping, which then prevailed to a great extent and
has since considerably increased, in consequence of the
defects of the present law. Regarding the former, our
laws in general are a mere transcript of those of the more
southern states, where the great number of slaves makes
it necessary for the safety of the whites, that the laws for
their government, and concerning free blacks, should be
very strict.&mdash;But, there being no such motive here, the
necessity of such laws ceases, and consequently their
injustice and cruelty are the more apparent. The latter
are found every day more and more defective and inefficient;
and kidnapping has now become a regular trade,
which is carried on to a vast extent to the country bordering
on the lower Mississippi, up the Red River, and to the
West Indies. To put an immediate and effectual stop to
this nefarious traffic, is the imperious duty of the
Legislature.</q><note place='foot'><q>H. J.</q> (Ill.), 1824-25,
p. 13; on kidnapping see Harris, <q>Negro
Servitude in Ill.,</q> 53 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
The house of representatives referred the governor's
remarks concerning kidnapping to a select committee. A
bill was reported, but after being weakened by amendments
it was tabled.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 1824-25,
pp. 26, 27, 151.</note> In his message in 1826 the governor
renewed his recommendations,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
1826-27, pp. 9-10.</note> and a section of the criminal
code of January, 1827, provided that kidnapping
should be punishable by confinement in the penitentiary
for not less than one nor more than seven years.<note place='foot'><q>Revised
Laws of Ill.,</q> 1833, 180-1.</note> An act
of January, 1825, provided that anyone who had failed to
give the bond required by the black code of 1819 from
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
those who emancipated slaves, should be released from any
verdict or judgment arising from such failure, upon indemnifying
the county for any money expended for the relief
of the freedmen.<note place='foot'><q>Laws of Ill.,</q>
1824-25, p. 50.</note> By an act of 1829 relating to slaves,
whites were not to marry blacks, slaves were not to come
to the state in order to be free, and runaway slaves should
be advertised in the newspapers of the state.<note place='foot'><q>Revised
Laws of Ill.</q> 1833, 463-65.</note> The number
of slaves in Illinois decreased after 1820. In 1820
there were 917 slaves in the state; in 1830, 747; in 1840,
331,<note place='foot'><q>Ninth Census of the U. S.,
Population and Social Statistics,</q> p. 7.</note>
and before the next census slavery in the state was
abolished.
</p>

<p>
The vote of 1824 against calling a constitutional convention
marked the end of the slavery question as an
obstacle to the immigration of an anti-slavery population.
Slaveholders, never a large proportion of the immigrants,
practically ceased to come to the state, while the immigration
of anti-slavery southerners continued, and the
aggregate immigration greatly increased. The population
of the state was 55,162 in 1820; 72,817, in 1825; and
157,445 in 1830. Missouri, more populous than Illinois
by more than 11,000 in 1820, was less so by 17,000 in
1830.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 3;
<q>H. J.</q> (Ill.), 1826, 11.</note> Governor Coles, in his message of January 3, 1826,
said: <q>The tide of emigration, which had been for several
years checked by various causes, both general and local,
has again set in, and has afforded a greater accession of
population during the past, than it had for the three preceding
years. This addition to our population and wealth
has given a new impulse to the industry and enterprise of
our citizens, and has sensibly animated the face of our
country. And as the causes which have impeded the
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
prosperity of the state are daily diminishing, and the
inducements to emigration are increasing, we may confidently
anticipate a more steady and rapid augmentation
of its population and resources.</q><note place='foot'><q>H. J.</q>
(Ill.), 1826, 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
From 1820 to 1825 the increase of population in Illinois
was 17,655, while from 1825 to 1830 it was 84,628. Contemporaries
have left some interesting records of immigration
during the latter five years&mdash;a period in which the
population of the state increased more than 116 per cent.
Immigration had begun to be brisk by the fall of 1824.
At the general election in August, 1820, there were 1132
votes cast in Madison county, while at a similar election in
August, 1824, there were 3223 votes cast in the same territory,
Madison county having been divided into Madison,
Pike, Fulton, Sangamon, Morgan and Greene counties. A
Madison county newspaper said: <q>That country bordering
on the Illinois River is populating at this time more rapidly
than at any former period. Family wagons with emigrants
are daily passing this place [Edwardsville], on their way
thither.</q><note place='foot'><q>Edwardsville (Ill.) Spectator,</q>
Oct. 5, 1824.</note> During the five weeks ending October 28, 1825,
about two hundred and fifty wagons, with an average of
five persons to each, passed through Vandalia, bound
chiefly for the Sangamo country.<note place='foot'><q>Niles'
Register,</q> XXIX., 208.</note> The unsettled condition
of the slavery question from 1820 to August, 1824, is given
as the cause of the slight increase in population during
that period, and the settlement of the question is thought
to have been a chief cause for the increase after
1824.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, XXIX., 422.</note>
It must not be supposed, however, that any one cause
excludes all others. The country as a whole had scarcely
recovered from the great financial depression of 1819;
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
Kentucky was in turmoil over her bank, land titles and
old and new courts;<note place='foot'>Shaler, <q>Kentucky,</q>
176-85.</note> early in 1825 over 65,000 acres in a
single county in Tennessee were advertised for sale for the
delinquent taxes of 1824;<note place='foot'><q>Nashville (Tenn.)
Republican,</q> Apr. 16, 1825.</note> and in 1826 a great drought in
North Carolina caused a marked emigration from that
state.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q> XXX., 449.</note>
</p>

<p>
In 1829 emigration was great. Some forty English
families from Yorkshire came by way of Canada and
settled near Jacksonville, Illinois. They brought agricultural
implements and some money.<note place='foot'><q>Galena Advertiser,</q>
July 20, Aug. 10, Sept. 21, 1829.</note> The <hi rend='italic'>Kentucky Gazette</hi>
lamented the fact that a large number of the best families of
Lexington were removing to Illinois.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXXVI., 222.</note> An Illinois newspaper
reported: <q>The number of emigrants passing through
our Town [Vandalia] this fall, is unusually great. During
the last week the waggons and teams going to the north
amounted to several hundred. At no previous period has our
State encreased so rapidly, as it is now encreasing.</q><note place='foot'><q>Illinois
Intelligencer</q> (Vandalia), Oct. 31, 1829.</note>
Another editor estimated the annual increase in population
from 1826 to 1829 at not less than 12,000<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXXVI., 271.</note>&mdash;a figure which
was almost certainly too low. In 1830 a meeting of gentlemen
from the counties of Hampshire and Hampden
(Massachusetts) was held at Northampton to consider the
expediency of forming a colony to remove to Illinois.
After a discussion it was voted to adjourn to meet on the
10th of October at Warner's Coffee House in Southampton.
Similar meetings were held at Pawtucket and Worcester.<note place='foot'><q>Illinois
Intelligencer</q> (Vandalia), Nov. 27, 1830.</note>
</p>

<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>

<p>
The immigration to Illinois was but part of a general
westward movement. From Charleston, Virginia, we hear:
<q>The tide of emigration through this place is rapid, and
we believe, unprecedented. It is believed that not less
than eight thousand individuals, since the 1st September
last [written on November 6, 1829], have passed on this
route. They are principally from the lower part of this
state and South Carolina, bound for Indiana, Illinois, and
Michigan.&mdash;They jog on, careless of the varying climate,
and apparently without regret for the friends and the
country they leave behind, seeking forests to fell, and a
new country to settle.</q> The editor attributes this movement
to the fact that slavery had rendered white labor
disreputable.<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXXVII., 195.</note> Three thousand persons bound for the
West arrived at Buffalo in one week and six thousand per
week were reported as passing through Indianapolis, bound
for the Wabash country alone.<note place='foot'><q>Galena Advertiser,</q>
July 20, 1829; <q>Niles' Register,</q> XXXVII., 230.</note> The great northern tide
was chiefly bound to Ohio and Michigan,<note place='foot'><q>Niles' Register,</q>
XXVIII., 161.</note> northern Illinois
not being open to settlement. Five years after Detroit
received three hundred arrivals per week, Chicago had
about a dozen houses, besides Fort Dearborn. This was
the Chicago of 1830.<note place='foot'><q>State Papers,</q>
No. 69, 21st Cong., 1st Sess., Vol. III.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Successful Frontiersmen.</head>

<p>
The character of the men who succeed in gaining the
favor of those among whom they live indicates the
character of those whose favor has been gained. Preachers,
land dealers, lawyers, town builders, and politicians can not
thrive in a hostile community. It is worth while in studying
Illinois in its frontier stage to notice some of the chief
traits of its leaders.
</p>

<p>
No better type of the pioneer preacher need be sought
than the Rev. Dr. Peter Cartwright. He preached in the
West for nearly seventy years, during which time he delivered
some eighteen thousand sermons, baptized some
fifteen thousand persons, received into the church nearly
twelve thousand members, and licensed preachers enough
to make a whole conference. He was for fifty years a
presiding elder in the Methodist Episcopal church. His
home was in Illinois from 1824 until his death in 1872.
Aside from his ministerial duties he twice represented
Sangamon county in the Illinois House of Representatives;
was a candidate for congressman against Abraham
Lincoln in 1846; and was a member of an historical society
founded as early as 1827.
</p>

<p>
Cartwright had a number of traits that attracted frontiersmen.
In person he was about five feet ten inches
high, and of square build, having a powerful physical
frame and weighing nearly two hundred pounds. <q>The
roughs and bruisers at camp-meetings and elsewhere stood
in awe of his brawny arm, and many anecdotes are told of
his courage and daring that sent terror to their ranks. He
felt that he was one of the Lord's breaking plows, and that he
had to drive his way through all kinds of roots and stubborn
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
soil.... His gesticulation, his manner of listening,
his walk, and his laugh were peculiar, and would command
attention in a crowd of a thousand. There was something
undefinable about the whole man that was attractive to
the majority of the people, and made them linger in his
presence and want to see him again.</q> He had a remarkable
power to read men, his first impressions being quickly
made and almost always correct. He was often gay, but
never frivolous; often eccentric, but never silly. A Cumberland
Presbyterian, after attending a communion service
administered by Cartwright and at which the Baptist, Rev.
John M. Peck, was present, wrote: <q>After meeting, I
invited these two men to spend the night with me, which
they did; and such a night!&mdash;of all Western anecdotes
and manners, flow of soul and out-spoken brotherhood&mdash;we
had never seen, and never expect to enjoy again.
These were, then [1824 c.], the two strongest men of mark
in the ministry, in this State [Illinois].</q> Cartwright's
vitality was remarkable. In the sixty-sixth year of his
ministry, and the eighty-sixth of his life, he dedicated eight
churches, preached at seventy-seven funerals, addressed
eight schools, baptized twenty adults and fifty children,
married five couples, received fifteen into the church on
probation and twenty-five into full connection, raised
twenty-five dollars missionary money, donated twenty
dollars for new churches, wrote one hundred and twelve
letters, delivered many lectures, and sold two hundred
dollars worth of books. Many frontier preachers of the
time were lacking in common sense, but they were not
popular. This is the testimony of a contemporary (1828)
writer whose analysis of western character has rarely been
excelled.<note place='foot'><p>Thomas S. Hinde,
writing over the signature of <q>Theophilus Arminius,</q>
in <q>Methodist Magazine,</q> XI., 1828, 154-8. The identity of the writer is
shown by a note on p. 33 of the same volume.
</p>
<p>
Among the many writings concerning Peter Cartwright, the best are Strickland,
<q>Autobiography of Peter Cartwright</q>; Cartwright, <q>Fifty Years as a
Presiding Elder,</q> and the obituary notice in <q>Minutes of the Annual Conferences
of the M. E. Church,</q> 1873, 115-7. See also Moses, <q>Illinois,</q>
I., 348, 379, 395, 506, 1166.
</p>
<p>
For the character of John M. Peck, also a noted pioneer preacher and
founder of Rock Spring Seminary in Illinois, see <q>Memoir of John Mason
Peck, D. D.,</q> edited by Rufus Babcock.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>

<p>
John Edgar, a native of Ireland, was one of the largest
landholders who ever lived in Illinois. At the outbreak
of the American Revolution he was a British officer living
at Detroit, but becoming implicated in the efforts of his
American wife to aid British soldiers in deserting, he was
imprisoned. He escaped, and in 1784 settled in Kaskaskia,
where his wife joined him two years later, having
saved from confiscation some twelve thousand dollars.
This made Edgar the rich man of the community. <q>In
very early times, he erected, at great expense, a fine flouring
mill on the same site where M. Paget had built one sixty
years before. This mill was a great benefit to the public
and also profitable to the proprietor. Before the year
1800, this mill manufactured great quantities of flour for
the New Orleans market which would compare well with
the Atlantic flour.</q> Edgar built a splendid mansion in
Kaskaskia and entertained royally. At a time when hospitality
was common he improved upon it. His home was
the fashionable resort for almost half a century. It was
here that Lafayette was entertained. In addition to his
flour mill, which attracted settlers to its vicinity near
Kaskaskia and which for many years did most of the
merchant business in flour in the country, Edgar owned
and operated salt works near the Mississippi, northwest of
Kaskaskia, and also invested largely in land. Before the
commissioners appointed to settle land claims he claimed
thirty-six thousand acres in one claim as the assignee of
ninety donation-rights, while he and John Murry St. Clair
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
claimed 13,986 acres which proved upon survey to cover
almost thirty thousand acres. In territorial times Edgar
paid more taxes than any one else in the territory. In
1790 Edgar was appointed chief justice of the Kaskaskia
district of St. Clair county; in 1800 he was <q>Lieutenant-Colonel
Commandant of the First Regiment of Militia of
the County of Randolph</q>; in 1802 he was commissioned
an associate judge of the Criminal Court of Randolph
county, by Governor Harrison. He had never studied
law <q>but common sense, a good education, and experience
in business with perfect honesty made him a very respectable
officer.</q> Edgar's correspondence with Clark and
Hamtramck show him to have been a leader in Illinois
during its period of anarchy preceding the establishment of
government in 1790. He offered to board a garrison on
the credit of the United States, if a garrison should be
sent to protect Illinois. At a time when slaveholding was
regarded as eminently respectable by the people of Illinois,
Edgar held slaves, and in 1796 he was one of four who
petitioned Congress to introduce slavery into the territory.
He was a member of the legislature of the Northwest
Territory, was worshipful master of the first Lodge of
Ancient Free and Accepted Masons in Illinois, constituted
at Kaskaskia in 1806, and was major-general of militia, in
which capacity he presided at reviews with much dignity.
In person Gen. Edgar was large and portly. He was
definitely charged with forgery by the commissioners to
settle land titles at Kaskaskia. In one case a letter signed
in a fair hand by one who had made his mark to a deed
was produced by Edgar. The letter was an offer of the
illiterate owner to sell his land to Edgar. There is no
indication that this conduct of the hospitable and popular
man changed the esteem in which he was held by his
contemporaries.<note place='foot'><q>Pub. Lands,</q>
I., 69-70; II., 203-4; <q>Early Chicago and Illinois,</q> in
<q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 145, 159, 167, 169-70, 178-9, 209; Reynolds,
<q>Pioneer Hist, of Ill.,</q> 110, 116-8, 180, 215; John Edgar to Clark,
from Kaskaskia, Nov. 7, 1785, in <q>Draper's Notes, Trip 1860,</q> VI., 214-5;
Edgar to Clark, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 23, 1786, <q>Draper Coll., Clark MSS.,</q>
LIII., 56; Petition from Kaskaskia, Sept. 14, 1789, <q>Draper Coll., Harmar
Papers,</q> II., 124-7; Offer of John Edgar, from Kaskaskia, Oct. 3, 1789,
<q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 127-8; Hamtramck's reply to the Kaskaskia
petition of Sept. 14, 1789, from Vincennes, Oct. 14, 1789, <q>Draper
Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 128-30; Edgar to Hamtramck, from Kaskaskia,
Oct. 28, 1789, ibid., II., 132-6; <q>DraperColl., Kenton MSS.,</q> Edgar Papers.</note>
</p>

<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>

<p>
John Rice Jones, the first lawyer in Illinois, was eminently
successful. He was born in Wales in 1759, received
a collegiate education at Oxford, England, and afterward
took regular courses in both medicine and law. In 1783
he was a lawyer in London and owned property in Wales.
The next year he came to Philadelphia where he practiced
law and became acquainted with Benjamin Rush, Benjamin
Franklin, Myers Fisher, and other distinguished men. In
1786 he came to Kentucky and joined Clark's troops
against the Wabash Indians. A garrison was irregularly
established at Vincennes and Jones was made commissary-general.
He sold seized Spanish goods to partially indemnify
those whose goods had been seized by the Spanish.
In 1790 Jones removed to Kaskaskia, bringing to his
residence on the frontier a mind well trained by education
and experience. He early became a large landowner, in
1808 paying taxes on 16,400 acres in Monroe county alone.
The list of offices held by Jones shows him to have been
prominent wherever he went. He was attorney-general
of the Northwest Territory, a member and president of the
legislative council of the same, joint-revisor with John
Johnson, of the laws of Indiana Territory, one of the first
trustees, as well as a chief promoter, of Vincennes University,
official interpreter and translator of French for the
commissioners appointed to settle land claims at Kaskaskia,
and after his removal to Missouri, about 1810, a
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
member of the Missouri Constitutional Convention of
1820, and, upon the admission of the state, justice of its
Supreme Court until his death in February, 1824. In
Missouri he engaged in lead mining and smelting with
Moses Austin and later with Austin's sons. He made an
exhaustive report on the lead mines of Missouri in 1816.
Jones was well versed in English, French and Spanish
law, especially in regard to land titles. He was an excellent
mathematician, and had also a thorough acquaintance with
the Greek, Latin, French, Spanish, English, and Welsh
languages. The pioneers recognized his peculiar fitness
for a legal career on the frontier. Governor Reynolds, a
fellow-townsman of Jones, says: <q>Judge Jones lived a
life of great activity and was conspicuous and prominent
in all the important transactions of the country ...
His integrity, honor, and honesty were always above doubt
or suspicion. He was exemplary in his moral habits, and
lived a temperate and orderly man in all things.</q><note place='foot'>Reynolds,
<q>Pioneer Hist. of Ill.,</q> 170-2; W. A. Burt Jones, in
<q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> IV., 230-70; Jones to Hamtramck, from Kaskaskia,
Oct. 29, 1789, <q>Draper Coll., Harmar Papers,</q> II., 136-41.</note>
</p>

<p>
The founding of the towns of Mt. Carmel, Alton and
Springfield illustrates the work of successful town building
on the frontier. Mt. Carmel was laid out in 1817, Alton
in 1818, and the land where Springfield now stands was
entered in 1823.
</p>

<p>
The town of Mt. Carmel was founded by three ministers,
Thomas S. Hinde, William McDowell and William
Beauchamp, the first two being proprietors and the last
agent and surveyor. McDowell probably never settled in
Illinois. Hinde and Beauchamp were men of more than
ordinary ability. The former was a son of the well-known
Dr. Hinde, of Virginia, who was a surgeon in the
British navy during the French and Indian war. Dr.
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
Hinde moved to Kentucky and there the boy Thomas
grew up. At one time he was a neighbor of Daniel
Boone, and later of Simon Kenton. He was in the office
of the Superior Court of Kentucky for some time, during
which he became well acquainted with Governor Madison
and his nephew, John Madison, kinsmen of President James
Madison. He was well informed as to some of the obscure
movements of Aaron Burr. This led him to send copies
of the <hi rend='italic'>Fredonian</hi>, which he published in order to oppose
Burr, to Henry Clay, then secretary of state, although the
copies later unaccountably disappeared; and, in 1829, to
write to James Madison, who was reported as contemplating
the writing of a political history, offering to furnish
information which he possessed at first hand concerning
the conspiracy. Madison denied any intention of writing
a history, but asked Hinde to furnish an account of Burr's
transactions to be filed with Madison's papers. This was
done. In 1806, Hinde moved to Ohio to get away from
slavery.
</p>

<p>
William Beauchamp was born in Kent county, Delaware,
in 1772. He became a minister in the Methodist
Episcopal Church in 1794, but located in 1801 on account
of ill health. His ministry had been markedly successful
and he had been stationed in New York and Boston. In
1807 he settled on the Little Kanawha River in Virginia,
and in 1815 moved to Chillicothe, Ohio, where he acted as
editor of the <hi rend='italic'>Western Christian Monitor</hi>, Hinde being a
contributor. Beauchamp knew Latin, Greek and Hebrew,
was a writer of considerable ability, and was well fitted to
be editor. In 1816, however, the General Conference
decided to establish a magazine, and in the following year
Beauchamp retired from the editorship of the <hi rend='italic'>Monitor</hi>,
having successfully established the first Methodist magazine
in America. Beauchamp, Hinde and McDowell were now
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
fellow-townsmen. They resolved to establish a town
where their ideas of rectitude might be applied.
</p>

<p>
The site chosen for the town was a point on the west
bank of the Wabash opposite the mouth of the White
River, and twenty-four miles southwest of Vincennes. This
point was selected because of the available water power
and of the likelihood that main roads from east to west
would pass here. The town became a railroad and manufacturing
center and justified the wisdom of its founders.
An elaborate circular, called the <q>Articles of Association,
for the City of Mount Carmel,</q> was issued at Chillicothe
in 1817. The purpose of the association was announced
to be <q>to build a city on liberal and advantageous principles,
and to constitute funds for the establishment of
seminaries of learning and for religious purposes.</q> The
proprietors reserved for themselves one-fourth of the lots,
these being called <q>proprietors' lots;</q> one-fourth were
called <q>public donation lots;</q> and one-half were called
<q>private donation lots.</q> The plan of survey and sale was
described as follows: <q rend='pre'>The front street is 132 feet wide;
the others 99. The in-lots are six poles in front, and
eleven and a half back; containing each sixty-eight
perches, nearly half an acre. The most of the out-lots
contain four acres and eight square poles; some of them
more, (five and six acres on the back range); and a few of
them less. There are 748 in-lots, and 331 out-lots&mdash;1079
in the whole.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>The lots are offered at private sale, at the following
prices:</q>
</p>

<p>
In-Lots On Front Street.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Corners, $150 each</l>
<l>Not corners,  100</l>
</lg>

<p>
The Rest Of The In-Lots.
</p>

<lg>
<l>Corners, $120 each</l>
<l>Not corners, 80</l>
<l>The out-lots, $100 each</l>
</lg>

<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The payments are to be made in four annual instalments;
the first at the time of sale.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>A bank is to be constituted by the sale of the lots.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>One-fourth of the lots are appropriated to the use of
schools and religious purposes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>One-half of the lots are to be given away to those who
will improve them according to the articles of association.
A person may have as many gift, or private donation out-lots,
as he has such in-lots; the out-lots not required to
be improved. The gift lots are to be disposed of on the
following terms: the persons receiving them pay the prices
above stated, and receive for the money thus paid, stock
in the aforesaid bank. They are to improve the in-lots
thus given to them, by building one dwelling-house for
every such in-lot; one-half of the houses to be built
within five years, and the other half within ten years, from
the sale of said lots. The houses to be framed, brick, or
stone, and to contain two rooms, and two fire-places each.</q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The bank referred to was <q>The Bank of Mount Carmel.</q>
Its shares were ten dollars each. The proprietors might
put into the stock one-half of the money received from
the sale of proprietors' lots; all the money received for
public donation lots was to be divided into three equal
parts, one part to be funded in the bank in the name of
the trustees (to be appointed) of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, the proceeds to be applied to the building of
<q>Methodist Episcopal meeting houses in the city of Mount
Carmel, and to other religious purposes,</q> not including
ministers' salary; the second part to be funded in the
name of the trustees (to be appointed) of a male academy;
the third part to be similarly funded for a female academy;
the money from private donation lots to be funded in the
name of the purchasers, after deducting ten per cent for
expenses, which ten per cent should remain in the bank
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
as permanent stock. The articles of association were
elaborate. The 18th article became known as the <q>Blue
Laws.</q> It read as follows: <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Art. 18.</hi>
No theatre or play-house
shall ever be built within the bounds of this city.
No person who shall be guilty of drunkenness, profane
swearing or cursing, Sabbath breaking, or who shall keep
a disorderly house, shall gamble, or suffer gambling in his
house, or raise a riot, or break the peace within the city, or
be guilty of any other crime of greater magnitude in guilt
than those here mentioned, and shall be convicted thereof
before the mayor, council, or any other court having cognizance
of such crime or crimes, shall be eligible to any
office of the city of Mount Carmel or its bank, or be
entitled to vote for any such officer, within three years
after such conviction, notwithstanding anything in these
articles to the contrary.</q>
</p>

<p>
The plan for a town was successful. Beauchamp was
surveyor, pastor, teacher, and lawyer in the beginning of
settlement. By 1819 a school was established; four or
five years later a school-house was built; by 1820 Mt.
Carmel circuit of the M. E. church had been formed; in
1825 a brick church was erected; the same year the town
was incorporated by the state on the plan laid down in
the articles of association; in 1827 the annual conference
of the Illinois Conference was held at Mt. Carmel.
</p>

<p>
Beauchamp's health having improved he reëntered the
ministry in 1822, and at the General Conference two years
later he lacked but two votes of being chosen bishop. He
died in 1824.
</p>

<p>
Hinde, in 1825, was a member of the Wabash Navigation
Company, consisting of seventeen prominent Indiana
and Illinois men, and having a capital stock of one million
dollars. He was one of the nine directors for the first
year. He continued to be a contributor to periodical literature
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
and became the biographer of his friend Beauchamp.
In a letter from Mt. Carmel, of May 6, 1842, Hinde says:
<q>I have just returned from the East, having visited the
Atlantic cities generally for the first time, after forty-five
years pioneering in the wilderness of the West. I have
been three times a citizen of Kentucky, twice of Ohio, and
twice of Illinois.</q> Hinde died in 1846 and was buried at
Mt. Carmel. Among his writings is found one of the
most acute analyses of frontier character that has appeared.
The writer points out that eastern ministers have often been
unsuccessful and eastern immigrants unpopular, because
they have underrated the people of the West, among
whom there are many people of culture. They prefer
<q>the <emph>useful</emph> to the shining or showy talent.</q> In the West
the best work has been done by westerners. The English
spoken in the West is the purest to be found, because the
various provincialisms of the immigrants are mutually
corrective. The Virginian, who retained his unbounded
hospitality, was the most prominent character in the West.
<q>If we expect to find on crossing the mountains a people
either illiterate or ignorant as a body, we will assuredly,
in many instances, be happily disappointed. It too often
happens, that one puffed up with self importance, and
possessing a conceited and heated imagination, will form
wild conjectures as to men and things. We have been
amused at the bewildered minds of such, with the <q>whys</q>
and <q>wherefores</q>; and one of the most ridiculous whims of
some, is to endeavour to press every thing into their own
<emph>mould</emph>; and shape it, be it what it may, if possible, after
their own manner, custom, or operation, forgetting that
<q>we have to take the world as it is, and not as we would
have it to be.</q> The fact is, an emigrant should come forth
as an inquirer, and set himself down to learn at the threshold
of experience. On this rock thousands have been
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
injured, and none have suffered more than the English
emigrants. Oh! with what poignant grief have I heard
the English emigrant exclaim with the bitterest invectives
on his own course and conduct, as to this particular.
Conceiving that he knew every thing, when he came here
to test his experience, he soon found that he <q>knew
nothing.</q> This circumstance I have found too to have its
bearings upon American emigrants from different states;
upon families, upon individuals, and upon preachers also.
How often have I heard the old settler complaining, (who
having himself learned by <emph>experience</emph>) of the impertinent
conduct of an emigrant, who sometimes carries his local
policy through all the ramifications of his life, and often into
the religious society, as well as elsewhere; he wishing every
thing done, as he saw it done in Boston, New-York, Philadelphia,
Baltimore, and very often <q>Old England</q> and
<q>Ireland!</q> as if men who have to act, and reflect upon the
circumstances of the case, different from any ever before
presented except among themselves, are to be governed
by acts and doings of people in the moon!</q><note place='foot'><p><q>Methodist
Magazine,</q> XI., 1828, 154-8. The remarks of Hinde
recall the difficulty which was experienced by the men who governed the
Northwest Territory under the Ordinance of 1787 when they attempted to
use only such laws as had been adopted by some state. The attempt was
early and finally abandoned. Hinde gives the following in a foot-note: <q>A
gentleman, a Virginian, a physician of eminence who was educated in Paris,
visited a western state many years ago [written in 1827], and lost all his money
by gambling, (playing at cards). Meeting a friend on the mountains on his
return, he was thus addressed: <q>Well, doctor, you have been to see the new
country.</q> <q>Yes,</q> replied the doctor, biting his lips, <q>it is a new country, it
is true; but there are some of the oldest people in it that I ever saw.</q></q>&mdash;See
above reference, p. 155.
</p>
<p>
On Mt. Carmel and its founders, in general, see: <q>Articles of Association
for the City of Mount Carmel</q>; Bangs, <q>Hist. of the M. E. Church,</q> IV.,
appendix, 3, 25; III., 230, 308-14; <q>Minutes of Conferences</q> Annual, M.
E., I., 347, 474, 516; <q>American Pioneer,</q> I., 327; II., 363-8; <q>Laws of
Ill., 1824-25,</q> 72-5; Simpson, <q>Cyclopedia of Methodism,</q> 97-S; <q>Methodist
Magazine,</q> VIII., 17, 49, 86. Less reliable data is given in <q>Hist. of
Edwards, Lawrence, and Wabash Counties, Ill.,</q> 85, 162, 189-90, 236, 238,
239. Mount Carmel is now (1908) the county seat of Wabash county. The
<q>Hinde MSS.</q> in the <q>Draper Coll.</q> are large in volume, but have slight
historic value, being chiefly musings of the author's later years.</p></note> A man who
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
thus knew the frontier was fitted to be the founder of a
western town.
</p>

<p>
Rufus Easton was the founder of the town of Alton.
Like Hinde, he brought to his work a fund of experience
gained on the frontier and in public affairs. Easton was
born at Washington, Litchfield county, Connecticut, in 1774.
He descended from pioneers, being a direct descendant of
Joseph Easton, who came from England to Newtowne,
now Cambridge, Massachusetts, about 1633, and was later
one of Rev. Thos. Hooker's colony which founded Hartford,
Connecticut, of which Easton was an original proprietor.
In 1792 Rufus Easton's father, a Tory, obtained a
large grant of land near Wolford, now Easton Corners,
Ontario. Rufus received a good education before studying
law. In 1798 he was practicing law in Rome, New
York, then a frontier town. November, 1801, Easton, with
thirteen other prominent men, held a banquet to celebrate
the election of Thos. Jefferson as President. The prominence
of the young lawyer at this time is shown by the
fact that he was consulted in regard to federal appointments,
and that he was in 1803 a confidential correspondent
of De Witt Clinton. The winter of 1803-4 Easton spent
in Washington, where he became a friend of Aaron Burr,
Postmaster-General Granger, and others. In the spring
of 1804 he started for New Orleans. Aaron Burr gave
him a letter of introduction to Abm. R. Ellery, Esq., of
New Orleans, in which he said: <q>You will certainly be
greatly amused to converse with a man who has passed
the whole winter in this city&mdash;who has had free intercourse
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
with the officers of Govt. &amp; members of Congress&mdash;who
has discernment to see beyond the surface, and frankness
and independence enough to speak his own sentiments.</q>
Easton did not, however, go to New Orleans. He stopped
for a short time at Vincennes and then located at St. Louis.
He was appointed by Jefferson judge of the Territory of
Louisiana and first postmaster of St. Louis. In September,
1805, Burr, Wilkinson and Easton had a conference at
St. Louis. Easton turned a deaf ear to Burr's questionable
proposals and from this time Wilkinson was hostile to
Easton. Easton corresponded with Jefferson and Granger
concerning the Burr conspiracy. Jefferson appointed him
United States attorney, 1814-18 he was delegate to Congress
from Missouri, 1821-26 he was attorney-general of
Missouri. Easton was very prominent, entertaining almost
all visitors of note. Edward Bates, Lincoln's attorney-general,
read law in Easton's office.
</p>

<p>
Soon after coming to St. Louis, Easton began to buy up
claims to land in Missouri and Illinois. When seeking to
find a suitable place for a town in Illinois, he selected a
point on the east bank of the Mississippi, twenty-five
miles north of St. Louis and twenty miles south of the
mouth of the Illinois. There was here a good landing
place for boats, and also extensive beds of coal and limestone.
The town was named Alton in honor of the
founder's son. One hundred lots in the new town were
donated to the support of the gospel and public schools,
one-half of the proceeds to be devoted to each. This
provision was confirmed by the act of incorporation of
January 30, 1821, and the trustees were given the right to
tax undonated lots for the support of schools. This latter
provision was in advance of public sentiment and two
years later it was repealed. Alton, like Mt. Carmel and to
a much greater extent, proved the wisdom of its location.
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
It has long been noted for its manufactures and is a
thriving modern city.<note place='foot'>Bay, <q>Reminiscences
of the Bench and Bar of Mo.,</q> 78-91; <q>Pub.
Lands,</q> II., index under Easton, Rufus; Easton, <q>Descendants of Joseph
Easton, Hartford, Conn.,</q> I, 37, 65; Moses, <q>Illinois,</q> I., 272; <q>Laws of
Ill., 1820-21,</q> 39-45; <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, 1822-23, 147.</note>
</p>

<p>
The town of Springfield, since 1839 the capital of
Illinois, was laid out in 1822, before the land upon which
it stood was offered for sale. When the land was sold in
November, 1823, the section upon which the town stood
was bought by Elijah Iles, Pascal Paoli Enos, Thomas
Cox, and Daniel P. Cook, each purchasing one quarter,
but the title being vested by agreement in Iles and Enos.
Cook, like McDowell in the founding of Mt. Carmel,
seems to have been a non-resident proprietor.
</p>

<p>
Elijah Iles was a child of the wilderness. He was born
in Kentucky in 1796, and died at Springfield, Illinois, in
1883, leaving valuable reminiscences of his long experience
on the frontier. His mother was Elizabeth Crockett Iles,
a relative of David Crockett. Elijah attended school two
winters and taught two winters. In 1812, although but
sixteen years of age, he acted as deputy for his father, who
was sheriff of Bath county, Kentucky. Some three years
later his father gave him three hundred dollars, with which
he bought one hundred head of yearling cattle. For three
years he herded these cattle among the mountains of Kentucky,
about twenty miles from civilization, having as his
only companions his horse, dog, gun, milk cow, and the
cattle. His meals usually consisted of a stew made of
bear meat, venison, or turkey, and a piece of fat bacon.
At the end of the three years the cattle were sold for
about ten dollars a head, and the youthful dealer having
attained his majority went to Missouri and became a land
agent for eastern speculators, and soon began to speculate
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
for himself. In 1821, concluding that Missouri was too
far from a market, he sold some of his land and resolved to
move to Illinois. At that time the site upon which Springfield
was to stand had been chosen as the temporary
county seat of Sangamon county, because eight men, some
of whom had families, lived within a radius of two miles
from the site, and at no other place in the county could
the lawyers and judge secure board and lodging. Iles
quickly discerned the advantages of the Sangamon country
as a place of settlement, and straightway built a log store
sixteen feet square, went to St. Louis and bought fifteen
hundred dollars worth of goods, which he loaded on a
keel-boat and had towed up the Mississippi and the
Illinois by six men, whom he paid seventy-five dollars
for their services. When the land was offered for sale, in
1823, Iles bought a quarter-section.
</p>

<p>
Another quarter-section of the town site was bought by
Pascal Paoli Enos. The fact that the frontier is a great
social leveler is well illustrated by the combination of
Enos and Iles as joint owners of a town site. The Enos
family had come from England in 1648, and Pascal Paoli
Enos, son of Major-General Roger Enos, was born in
Windsor, Connecticut, in 1770. He was graduated from
Dartmouth College in 1794, studied law, was a member of
the Vermont legislature in 1804, married in Vermont and
moved to Cincinnati in 1815, later to St. Charles, Missouri,
then to St. Louis, then to Madison county, Illinois, and in
1823 was appointed by President Monroe receiver of
public moneys for the land-office in the District of Sangamo.
Thus the elderly scholar joined the shrewd but
youthful frontiersman.
</p>

<p>
Col. Thomas Cox was the third of the trio of the resident
proprietors of Springfield. He had signed a petition
for the division of Randolph county in 1812, represented
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
Union county as a senator in the first general assembly of
Illinois, and in 1820 was appointed register of the land-office
at Vandalia. In 1823 he came to Springfield as
register of the land-office at that place. Col. Cox was six
feet tall, weighed two hundred and forty pounds, and was
a drunkard within a short time after the founding of
Springfield.
</p>

<p>
The most important thing about the founding of the
town is the heterogeneous character of its founders. A
few incidents in their subsequent history will emphasize
this, and also show how well they worked together when
surrounded by the same conditions. When the commissioners
came to locate a permanent county seat Springfield,
then called Calhoun, had a formidable rival for the
honor. Iles and Enos managed to have a mutual friend
engaged as guide to the commissioners. The guide conducted
them to the rival settlement by a long and rough
route and upon being requested to take them back over a
shorter route he took a course more difficult still. The
commissioners decided that the rival settlement was inaccessible.
Iles was twice state senator, major in the Winnebago
war, and captain in the Black Hawk war, in which
he served with Zachary Taylor, Jefferson Davis, Abraham
Lincoln, John T. Stuart, Robt. Anderson, of Fort Sumter
fame, and others. Iles was also a large stock dealer, selling
hogs and cattle in St. Louis and mules in Kentucky, until
1838, in which year he lost ten thousand dollars on hogs
packed at Alton. In 1838-9 he built the American House
in Springfield. This was then the largest hotel in the
state and its erection created a great sensation. He was
four times state senator, and was an officer of the Bank of
Edwardsville. Enos held his position as receiver until
removed for political reasons by Jackson in 1829. Cox
had an eventful career. He was removed from his position
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
of register, under charges of misconduct, early in 1827;
the next year he was keeping a hotel in Springfield; later
he removed to Iowa, then Wisconsin, having secured a
contract for the survey of public lands. He was three
times a member of the Iowa territorial House of Representatives
and twice a member of the territorial Council.
A band of murderers, horsethieves, counterfeiters, and
blacklegs, having gained possession of the town of Bellevue,
on the Mississippi, in Jackson county, Iowa, Col. Cox
led the citizens in a successful attack in which seven men
were killed outright and some ten or fifteen wounded. At
this time Cox was recognized as a pronounced drunkard,
but his undoubted courage, ability to command, and strong
physique secured him a following.<note place='foot'>For
information concerning Iles, see: <q>Reminiscences of Elijah Iles,</q>
in <q>Hist. of Sangamon County, Ill.,</q> 580-3; Power, <q>Hist. of the Early
Settlers of Sangamon Co., Ill.,</q> 397-400 (practically a short autobiography
of Iles, written in 1876); Moses, <q>Illinois,</q> I., 344; II., 1174. Concerning
Enos, see: Stiles, <q>Ancient Windsor,</q> (Conn.), II., 245, 246; <q>Executive
Journal,</q> Senate, 1815-29, pp. 325, 328, 551, 553,
555; <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, 1829-37, pp. 50,
391; <q>Edwards Papers,</q> in <q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> III., 205, 391.
Concerning Cox, see: Moses, <q>Illinois,</q> II., 1168; <q>Executive Journal,</q>
Senate, 1815-29, pp. 216-7, 325, 328, 551, 553, 555; Washburne, <q>Sketch
of Edward Coles,</q> 128-30; <q>Edwards Papers,</q> in <q>Chicago Hist. Soc.
Coll.,</q> III., 76, 211, 336-7; Gue, <q>Hist. of Iowa,</q> I., 205, 211; Fairall,
<q>Manual of Iowa Politics,</q> 107; <q>Hist. of Jackson County,</q> Iowa, 360-403.
On Springfield, see: Peck, <q>Gazetteer of Illinois,</q> 1834, 337.</note>
</p>

<p>
Shadrach Bond, the first governor of Illinois, and Pierre
Menard, the first lieutenant-governor, were both poorly
educated, but they had a good knowledge of men and a
large fund of information concerning practical affairs.<note place='foot'>Moses,
<q>Illinois,</q> I., 287, 289-90; Reynolds, <q>Pioneer Hist. of Ill.,</q>
291-4, 323-7.</note>
Edward Coles, the second governor of the state, is a good
example of the polished, well-educated gentleman succeeding
with a rude constituency. Coles was born in 1786,
in Albemarle county, Virginia, fitted for college by private
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
tutors, educated at Hampden Sidney and later at William
and Mary College. His father's home was visited by
Patrick Henry, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, the Randolphs,
Tazwell, Wirt, and others. For six years Coles
was the private secretary of President Madison, and during
this time he became an intimate friend of Nicholas Biddle.
In 1815 he visited Illinois in what must have seemed at
that time great state, for he traveled not only with a horse
and buggy, but with a servant and a saddle-horse as well.
In 1816-17 he was sent as a special messenger to Russia,
stopping at Paris on his return, meeting Louis XVIII. of
France and becoming a friend of Lafayette. In 1819 he
came to Edwardsville, Illinois, emancipated his slaves, and
assumed his duties as register of the land-office. The
rough pioneers were very anxious to get a title to their
lands. <q rend='pre'>When the settler reached Edwardsville, dressed
in jeans and wearing moccasins, with his money in his
belt, having traveled on foot or on horseback long distances,
and first presented himself to the Register of the
Land Office, there he found Edward Coles, who had
recently emigrated into the State from Virginia. It was
known to some of them that he had been the private secretary
for President Madison, and had been on an important
mission to Europe.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They found him a young man of handsome, but somewhat
awkward personal appearance, genteelly dressed, and
of kind and agreeable manners. The anxious settler was
at once put at ease by the suavity of his address, the
interest he appeared to feel in aiding him, and the thoroughly
intelligent manner in which he discharged his
duty. No man went away who was not delighted with
his intercourse with the <q>Register.</q> And herein is illustrated
the great mistake so often made by politicians and
candidates for popular favor. Too many candidates for
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
the suffrage of the people in our early political contests
thought it necessary, in order to make themselves popular,
to affect slovenly and unclean dress and vulgar
manners in their campaigns. There was never a greater
mistake. However rough, ill-clothed and unintelligent
the voter might be, he always preferred to vote for the
man who was dressed and acted like a gentleman to the
one who dressed like and acted like himself.</q><note place='foot'>Washburne,
<q>Sketch of Edward Coles,</q> 16 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, 54-7. Washburne,
the writer, came to Galena, Illinois, when it still had many frontier characteristics,
and for seventeen years represented his district in Congress.</note> Coles
was always dignified, always gentlemanly, and always
respected. His brief residence in Illinois affected its
history for all time to come. Like Coles in several
respects was his successor as governor, Ninian Edwards.
Born in Maryland in 1775, educated by the celebrated
William Wirt, and later graduating from Dickinson College,
Pennsylvania, at nineteen years of age he came to Kentucky.
Here he served two terms in the Kentucky
legislature, was presiding judge of the general court,
circuit judge, and chief-justice of the court of appeals.
Henry Clay gave as Edwards' marked characteristics,
good understanding, weight of character, and conciliatory
manners. In his campaign for governor of Illinois,
Edwards presented himself as the highest type of a polished
and well-dressed gentleman, always riding in his
own carriage and driven by his negro servant, and dressing
in all the style of an old-fashioned gentleman with broad-cloth
coat, ruffled shirt, and high-topped boots. The
people were not repelled by such a display, but considered
it an honor to vote for such a man. The egotistical
Adolphus Frederick Hubbard, who was one of the two
opponents of Edwards, intermingled bad grammar and
poor attempts at wit in his electioneering speeches, and
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
received less than one-tenth of the number of votes cast
for either of the two other candidates.<note place='foot'>Moses,
<q>Illinois,</q> L., 242-3, 336, 340-1, 351; Washburne, <q>Sketch of
Edward Coles,</q> 54-7; and for a general view of Edwards, see: N. W. Edwards,
<q>Hist. of Ill. and Life of Ninian Edwards,</q> and <q>The Edwards Papers,</q> in
<q>Chicago Hist. Soc. Coll.,</q> III.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Works Consulted.</head>

<div>
<head>I. Sources.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>American Historical Association, Annual Report of the. Washington:
Government Printing Office.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Report for 1893, pp. 199-227, see Turner, Frederick Jackson; Report of
1896, Vol. I., pp. 930-1107, has <q>Selections from the Draper Collection in
the possession of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, to elucidate the
proposed French expedition under George Rogers Clark against Louisiana,
in the years 1793-94.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>American monthly Magazine and critical Review. New York:
H. Biglow, editor.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Volumes I.-III. (1817-18) give information of much value concerning
European conditions inducing emigration. A few of the notices concern
emigration from east to west in the United States.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>American Register; or, Summary Review of History, Politics, and
Literature. Philadelphia.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Volume II., 202, 203, 216 (1817), tells of improvements in steamboat navigation.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Americans as they are; described in a Tour through the Valley of
the Mississippi. London: Hurst, Chance &amp; Co.,</hi> 1828. vi. +
218 pp.
</p>

<p>
Observations on Illinois are more suggestive than accurate.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Atwater, Caleb</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Remarks made on a Tour to Prairie du
Chien. Columbus, Ohio: Isaac N. Whiting</hi>, 1831. 296 pp.
</p>

<p>
The tour was from Circleville, Ohio, to Prairie du Chien, in 1829, and
thence to Washington. The writer's remarks give valuable material for the
history of the time.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>Writings. Columbus, Ohio: Caleb Atwater</hi>, 1833.
408 pp.
</p>

<p>
The author was one of a commission to treat with the Indians at Prairie du
Chien for the cession of the lead region. In 1829 he went from St. Louis to
Prairie du Chien. He gives good descriptions of Quincy, Galena, and a few
other places. The part of the Writings describing this journey was separately
printed in 1831. The edition of 1833 is somewhat better than the previous
one.
</p>

<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Balestier, Joseph N</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Annals of Chicago: a
Lecture delivered before the Chicago Lyceum, Jan. 21, 1840. Republished from the
original Edition of 1840, with an Introduction, written by the Author
in 1876. Chicago: Fergus Printing Co.</hi>, 1876. In <hi rend='italic'>Fergus historical
Series</hi>, I., No. 1. 48 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains a copy of Capt. Heald's letter of 1812, describing the massacre
at Fort Dearborn.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Biggs, William.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of William Biggs,
while he was a Prisoner with the Kickepoo Indians ... on the west Bank
of the Wabash River ... Printed for the author, June,
1826.</hi> 22 pp.
</p>

<p>
Biggs was captured on March 28, 1788, and remained a captive for several
weeks. This very rare book gives valuable insight into the revolting customs
of the Indians.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Birkbeck, Morris.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Extracts from a
supplementary Letter from the Illinois: an Address to British Emigrants, and a Reply
to the Remarks of William Cobbett, Esq. 2d ed. London: James
Ridgeway</hi>, 1819. 36 pp.
</p>

<p>
Birkbeck had issued an address to British emigrants, advertising the virtues
of his English settlement in Illinois. William Cobbett declared that Birkbeck's
account of the fertility and salubrity of Illinois was not true. Birkbeck
issued a somewhat scathing reply, showing Cobbett's ignorance.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>Letters from Illinois. Philadelphia: M. Carey &amp;
Son</hi>, 1818. 12mo. vii. + 154 pp.
</p>

<p>
Twenty-two letters written from November, 1817, to March, 1818, by
Morris Birkbeck, from the English settlement in Edwards county, Ill., of
which settlement he was the founder. Very valuable for notes concerning
transportation and the manner of life of the early settlers of Illinois.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>Notes on a Journey in America from the Coast of Virginia
to the Territory of Illinois. Philadelphia: Richardson</hi>, 1817.
</p>

<p>
Passed through several editions in England.
</p>

<p>
A graphic account of the journey of Birkbeck from 500 miles east of Cape
Henry, Va. (April 26, 1817), to Shawneetown, Ill., where on August 2, 1817,
he bought 1440 acres of land as a site for his English settlement. Very
valuable for information concerning transportation and western conditions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Blaney</hi>, Capt. <hi rend='italic'>An Excursion through
the United States and
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
Canada during the years 1822-23. By an English Gentleman.
London: Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy</hi>, 1824. 16mo. 511 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 156-92 tell of the author's trip across Illinois. He visited Albion and
then went to St. Louis overland. The descriptions of Birkbeck's settlement,
the difficulties of prairie travel, and of the frontier life encountered are much
above the average of travelers' reports.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Bonner</hi>, T. D. <hi rend='italic'>Life and Adventures of James P.
Beckwourth, Mountaineer, Scout, and Pioneer, and Chief of the Crow Nation of
Indians. Written from his own Dictation. New York: Harper &amp;
Bros.</hi>, 1858. 16mo. 535 pp.
</p>

<p>
The book deals almost entirely with the region west of the Mississippi, but
in 1820 Beckwourth visited Galena. He went from St. Louis with a party
led by Col. R. M. Johnson, the object of the party being to gain a mining
concession from the Sauk Indians.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brannan, John</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Editor</hi>).
<hi rend='italic'>Official Letters of the military and
naval Officers of the United States, during the War with Great
Britain in the Years 1812, 13, 14, &amp; 15. Washington: Way &amp;
Gideon, 1823.</hi> 510 pp.
</p>

<p>
A valuable collection. Printed without comment. Pages 84-5 give Capt.
Heald's official report of the massacre at Fort Dearborn, August 15, 1812.
The report is in a letter to Thos. H. Cushing, Adjutant General, written from
Pittsburg, October 23, 1812.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brodhead</hi>, Col. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Daniel</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>A Letter from Brodhead to Gen.
Washington referring to La Balme's Expedition.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>The olden Time</hi>, II., 390-91.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Butricke, George</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Affairs at Fort
Chartres, 1768-1781.
Albany: J. Munsell</hi>, 1864. 10 pp.
</p>

<p>
Reprinted from <hi rend='italic'>Historical Magazine</hi>, VIII., No, 8. Valuable. Several
letters written by Geo. Butricke, then stationed at Fort Chartres. Contains
interesting notes on Indians, Spaniards, and British. Tells of epidemic.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Calendar of Virginia State Papers and other Manuscripts.
Richmond, Va.</hi>, 1875-1900. 9 vols.
</p>

<p>
The early volumes have documents of great value concerning the period
when Illinois was a part of Virginia.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cartwright, Peter</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Autobiography of
Peter Cartwright, the
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
backwoods Preacher. Ed. by W. P. Strickland. New York:
Carlton &amp; Porter</hi>, 1857, 16mo. 525 pp.
</p>

<p>
The author was from 1803 to the time of writing his book (1856) one of
the most famous circuit riders. His first work was in Kentucky. He came
to Illinois in 1823. His views on slavery, which caused his removal, are
interesting. A valuable work, especially for giving an insight into the social
life of the time.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Chetlain</hi>, Gen. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Augustus Louis</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Recollections of seventy
Years. Galena: The Gazette Pub. Co.</hi>, 1899. 304 pp.
</p>

<p>
The author was one of the first settlers in Galena, and gives valuable information
concerning that important region&mdash;1821 ff.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chicago Historical Society's Collections. Chicago</hi>, 1882-90:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
I. History of the English Settlement in Edwards County, Illinois, by
George Flower, 1882. 408 pp.
</p>

<p>
II. Sketch of Enoch Long, by Harvey Reid, 1884. 112 pp.
</p>

<p>
III. The Edwards Papers, edited by E. B. Washburne, 1884. 632 pp.
</p>

<p>
IV. Early Chicago and Illinois, 1889. 400 pp. Of great value.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Childs</hi>, Col. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ebenezer</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Recollections of Wisconsin since 1820.
In Wis. Hist. Coll.</hi>, IV., 1859, 153-95.
</p>

<p>
The writer describes Chicago as it was in 1821, at which time he visited it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Christian Spectator</hi>, V., 1823, 20-26. <hi rend='italic'>Remarks
on the States of Illinois and Missouri</hi>, by Edward Hollister.
</p>

<p>
The author had recently completed a missionary tour in these states, and
his remarks give an insight into the social conditions of the time.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cobbett, William</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>A Years Residence, in
the United States of America, 3d ed. London: William Cobbett</hi>, 1828. 370 pp.
</p>

<p>
Cobbett was in the United States in 1817-18. He declared that Birkbeck
and Fearon had deceived the people of England by portraying America as
better than it was. His book is unfair.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Coffin, Levi</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Reminiscences of Levi
Coffin, the reputed President of the Underground Railroad.... Cincinnati: Western
Tract Society</hi> [c. 1876]. <hi rend='italic'>2d ed. with appendix. Cincinnati: Robert
Clarke &amp; Co.</hi>, 1880. 732 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 89-99 describe the author's visit to a Quaker settlement in Sangamon
county, Ill., in 1823. Lost on the prairies.
</p>

<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Collot, Victor</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>A Journey in North America,
containing a Survey of the Countries watered by the Mississippi, Ohio, Missouri,
and other affluing Rivers ... Illustrated by 36 Maps, Plans,
Views, and divers Cuts. Paris: Arthus Bertrand</hi>, 1826. 2 vols.
and atlas in one. iv. + 310; v. + 272 pp.
</p>

<p>
The author traveled through Illinois in 1796. His observations were acute
and are more helpful than would be expected from a soldier of fortune. The
New Orleans <hi rend='italic'>Picayune</hi> of March 18, 1901, has a valuable article on
the journey of Collot and its purpose. See his <hi rend='italic'>Map of the Country of
the Illinois</hi>, in pocket.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Columbian Centinel. Boston, June-December</hi>, 1790; 1791-1801;
1802-1829.
</p>

<p>
The issue for June 16, 1790, has a note on the current experiments with
steamboats. In Library of Wisconsin State Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Croghan, George</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Journal</hi>, 1765. In
Thwaites, <hi rend='italic'>Early western
Travels, I., 126-73. Cleveland, Ohio: Arthur H. Clark Company</hi>,
1904.
</p>

<p>
The Journal is of a trip to the West, and characterizes the early French
settlers.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cuming, Fortescue.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Sketches of a Tour to the
western Country,... commenced at Philadelphia in the Winter of 1807
and concluded in 1809. Pittsburg: Cramer, Spear &amp; Eichbaum</hi>,
1810. 12mo. 504 pp.
</p>

<p>
Describes Shawneetown and gives some information in regard to routes.
Very slight, however, in respect to Illinois. Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>The Inter
Ocean, August 3, 1904.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cutler, Julia Perkins</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Life and Times of
Ephraim Cutler. Prepared from his Journals and Correspondence. Cincinnati: Robert
Clarke &amp; Co.</hi>, 1890. 353 pp.
</p>

<p>
Cutler early settled in Ohio. This work gives good examples of the difficulties
of travel, between 1795 and 1809, on some of the Alleghany routes
frequented by emigrants to Illinois. The driving of western cattle to market
is also described.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cutler, William Parker</hi>, and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cutler, Julia Perkins</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Life, Journals and Correspondence of Rev. Manasseh Cutler</hi>,
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
LL. D. Cincinnati: Robert Clarke &amp; Co., 1888. 2 vols. 9 + 524;
495 PP.
</p>

<p>
Considerable information concerning early eastern opposition to western
settlement is given. Dr. Cutler kept a diary from 1765 to 1823, of which
nine years are missing.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>De Peyster, J. Watts</hi>, LL. D.
<hi rend='italic'>Miscellanies, by an Officer</hi>
[Colonel Arent Schuyler de Peyster, B. A.], 1774-1813. <hi rend='italic'>New
York: A. E. Chasmar &amp; Co.</hi>, 1888. 80 pp., and an appendix of
cci. pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages xxvi.-xxvii. contain a letter from Arent De Peyster to Capt.
McKee describing an Illinois expedition against St. Josephs in 1780 or 1781.
Letter dated Detroit, Feb. 1, 1781.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Draper Collection of Manuscripts.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This collection, made by Lyman C. Draper, is the property of the State
Historical Society of Wisconsin. It has been of more value to the writer
than any other single source, being especially helpful for the hitherto obscure
period immediately succeeding the expedition of George Rogers Clark, 1779-1790.
Most important of all are the Harmar Papers, although the Illinois
MSS., the Clark MSS., and Draper's Notes were much used. The Hinde
MSS. have little historical value, consisting as they do, largely of religious
musings of the writer's old age.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Duden, Gottfried</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Bericht über eine Reise nach den westlichen
Staaten Nordamerika's and einen mehrjährigen Aufenthalt am
Missouri (in den Jahren 1824-1827) in Bezug auf Auswanderung
und Uebervölkerung. 1st ed. of 1500 copies. 2d ed. Bonn, In
Commission bei Eduard Weber</hi>, 1834. lviii. + 404 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains a prediction of Illinois future greatness. Gives valuable information
concerning the cost and manner of transportation, and concerning social
life. Comparison of American and European conditions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dunn, Jacob Piatt</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Compiler.
Slavery Petitions and Papers.
In Indiana Hist. Soc. Pub., II., 443-529. Indianapolis: The
Bowen-Merrill Company</hi>, 1894.
</p>

<p>
<q>The following papers are the petitions to Congress from Northwest and
Indiana Territories for the suspension of the sixth article of compact of the
Ordinance of 1787, and the admission of slavery to the Territory, together
with the counter-petitions, the reports on them, and the accompanying
documents,</q>&mdash;Compiler's
introduction.
</p>

<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Edwardsville Spectator. Edwardsville, Ill.: Hooper Warren,
pub., Apr. 18, 1820-Feb. 8, 1825, and 1820-22.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Material has been gleaned from the issues of Nov. 7, 1820; August 31,
1822; Nov. 30, 1822; Nov. 29, 1823; Jan. 27, 1824; and Oct 5, 1824. In
Library of Chicago Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ernst, Ferdinand</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Travels in Illinois in 1819. Translation
from the German Original.</hi> In <hi rend='italic'>Pub. No. 8 of the Ill. Hist. Lib.</hi>
pp. 150-65. <hi rend='italic'>Springfield, Ill.: Phillips Bros.</hi>, 1904.
</p>

<p>
Ernst was the leader of a party of German immigrants who settled at Vandalia
soon after his journey to Illinois. He gives a vivid picture of the
rapidly settling Illinois with its squatters and its fertile and inviting land.
He visited the Sangamo country and the Kickapoo United States treaty conference.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Faux, W.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Memorable Days in America: being a Journal of a
Tour to the United States, principally undertaken to ascertain, by
positive Evidence, the Condition and probable Prospects of British
Emigrants; including Accounts of Mr. Birkbeck's Settlement in the
Illinois ... London: W. Simpkin &amp; R. Marshall</hi>, 1823.
488 pp.
</p>

<p>
Sufficiently pessimistic to require cautious use. The journey was performed
in 1819-20.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Fay</hi>, H. A.
<hi rend='italic'>Collection of the official Accounts, in Detail, of all the
Battles fought by Sea and Land, between the Navy and Army of
the United States, and the Navy and Army of Great Britain, during
the Years</hi> 1812, 13, 14, &amp; 15. <hi rend='italic'>New York: E. Conrad</hi>, 1817.
295 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains Capt. Heald's official report of the massacre at Fort Dearborn,
August 15, 1812, and Col. Russell's official report of Gov. Edwards' attack
on the Indians near Peoria in 1812.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Fearon, Henry Bradshaw</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Sketches of America. A Narrative
of a Journey of five thousand Miles through the eastern and western
States of America ... With Remarks on Mr. Birkbeck's
<q>Notes</q> and <q>Letters.</q> 3d ed. London: Strahan and Spottiswoode</hi>,
1819. xv. + 454 pp.
</p>

<p>
The work gives a glimpse of Illinois through a foreigner's eye. Fearon
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
paints in sober colors, but his values are fairly true. Of considerable value
as a work on society in the U. S. in 1817-18.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Flint, James.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Letters from America, containing Observations
on the Climate and Agriculture of the western States, the Manners of
the People, and the Prospects of Emigrants, &amp;c., &amp;c. Edinburgh:
W. &amp; C. Tait, 1822.</hi> 16mo. 330 pp.
</p>

<p>
The author probably did not reach Illinois, but his letters from Ohio,
Indiana and Kentucky give interesting bits of information in regard to the
manner and cost of travel&mdash;1818 to 1820.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Flower, George.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of the English Settlement in Edwards
County, Illinois, founded in 1817 and 1818, by Morris Birkbeck
and George Flower. Chicago: Fergus Printing Co., 1882.</hi> 16mo.
401 pp.
</p>

<p>
The work is volume I. of the Chicago Historical Society's Collections.
The best book on this important episode in immigration to Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Flower, Richard.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Letters from Lexington and
the Illinois, containing a brief Account of the English Settlement in the latter
Territory, and a Refutation of the Misrepresentations of Mr. Cobbett.
London: J. Rigdway, 1819.</hi> iv. + 32 pp.
</p>

<p>
Two letters&mdash;one from Lexington and the other from New Albion, Ill.
Highly colored.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Forsyth</hi>, Maj. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thomas</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Indian Agent</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Voyage
from St. Louis to the Falls of St. Anthony, in 1819.</hi> In <hi rend='italic'>Wis.
Hist. Coll.</hi>, VI., 188-215. <hi rend='italic'>Madison, Wis.: Atwood &amp; Culver,
State Printers, 1872.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Incidentally the writer gives an account of the atrocities committed in 1812
by Capt. Thomas E. Craig upon the inhabitants of Peoria. Forsyth was an
eye-witness of the barbarities described.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Galena Advertiser. Galena, Ill. Pub. by H. Newhall, Philleo
and Co., July 20, 1829-May 24, 1830, and July 20, 1829-May
10, 1830.</hi>
</p>

<p>
July 20, July 27, August 10, Sept. 14, Sept. 21, 1829, have been used. In
Library of Chicago Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Galena (Ill.) Weekly Gazette.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The issue for May 2, 1879, contains reminiscences of Mrs. Adile B. Gratiot,
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
whose husband settled in Galena, Ill., in 1825. This account furnishes a
valuable bit of reliable history. It describes Galena, northern Illinois, a Fourth
of July celebration (1826), the coming of Lord Selkirk's colonists, and the
trouble with the Sauk Indians (1827).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gillespie</hi>, Hon. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Joseph</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Recollections of early Illinois and
her noted Men. Fergus hist. Series</hi>, No. 13. 51 pp. <hi rend='italic'>Chicago:
Fergus Printing Co., 1880.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Valuable because of the author's direct knowledge of persons and events.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Goodrich, Samuel Griswold.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Recollections of
a Life Time; or, Men and Things I have seen: in a Series of Letters to a Friend,
historical, biographical, anecdotal, and descriptive. New York:
Miller, Orton &amp; Co., 1857.</hi> 2 vols. 542, 563 pp.
</p>

<p>
Letter XXXIII. describes the emigration from East to West in 1816-17.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gratiot</hi>, Mrs. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Adile</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>In early Illinois (Towns).</hi>
</p>

<p>
A volume of newspaper clippings in the Library of the Chicago Historical
Society. Mrs. Gratiot, who early lived in Galena, gives reminiscences of
her life there. Describes the trouble with the Winnebago Indians.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hall, James.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Letters from the West;
containing Sketches of Scenery, Manners, and Customs; and Anecdotes connected with the
first Settlements of the western Sections of the United States. London:
Henry Colburn, 1828.</hi> 16mo. 385 pp.
</p>

<p>
Verbose, but not without value. One of the twenty-two letters is from
Shawneetown and describes the vicinity. Illinois is defended from her foreign
detractors. Routes and manner of travel receive much attention.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hamilton, Henry Edward.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Incidents and Events
in the Life of Gurdon Saltonstall Hubbard, collected from personal Narrations
and other Sources, and arranged by his Nephew, Henry E. Hamilton.
Chicago: Rand, McNally &amp; Co., 1888.</hi> 189 pp.
</p>

<p>
Very valuable for the history of northern and eastern Illinois from 1818 to
the close of the Black Hawk war. Most of the work is autobiographical.
Mr. Hubbard was an employee of the American Fur Company. Later he was
in business in Danville and Chicago.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Harding, Benjamin.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>A Tour through the
Western Country, A. D. 1818 &amp; 1819. New London: Samuel Green, 1819.</hi> 8vo.
17 pp.
</p>

<p>
The inducements which Illinois offered to emigrants are described with a
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
degree of sense rarely displayed in the period to which the work belongs by
writers of advice to emigrants. The American Bottom and the prairies are
described.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Harris, William Tell.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Remarks made during a
Tour through the United States of America, in the Years 1817, 1818, and 1819.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Describes Shawneetown (1818), and speaks of the great number of wagons,
horses, and passengers which crossed the ferry there.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hecke, J. Val.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch die Vereinigten
Staaten von Nord-Amerika in den Jahren 1818 und 1819. Nebst einer kurzen
Uebersicht der neuesten Ereignisse auf dem Kriegs-Schauplatz in
Sud-Amerika und West-Indien. Berlin: H. Ph. Petri</hi>, 1820-21.
2 vols. 16mo. I., 228; II., xvi. + 326. pp.
</p>

<p>
Interesting and incorrect. The author tells well both of what he knows
and what he does not know. Tells foreigners how to reach Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Henry, William Wirt.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Patrick Henry. Life,
Correspondence, and Speeches. New York: Charles Scribners Sons</hi>, 1891. 3 vols.
I., 20 + 622; II., 652; III., 672 pp.
</p>

<p>
The third volume contains instructions issued by Gov. Henry to officers of
the County of Illinois, and some correspondence of those officers.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Historical Register of the United States. Philadelphia: G.
Palmer</hi>, 1814-1816.
</p>

<p>
II., 60-62 (second pagination) gives Capt. Heald's official report of the
massacre at Fort Dearborn on August 15, 1812.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hodgson, Adam.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Remarks during a Journey
through North America in the Years 1819-21, in a Series of Letters: with an
Appendix, containing an Account of several of the Indian Tribes,
and the principal missionary Stations, &amp;c. New York: Samuel
Whiting, 1823.</hi> 8vo. iv. + 335 pp.
</p>

<p>
The author did not visit Illinois, but he gives an interesting criticism of
Mr. Birkbeck's venture in Illinois. He conversed with persons who had visited
Birkbeck's settlement. Criticism rather unfavorable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Holmes, Isaac.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>An Account of the United
States of America</hi>, [1823] <hi rend='italic'>derived from actual Observation, during
a Residence of four Years in that Republic: including original Communications.
London: Caxton Press</hi>, 1823. 16mo. viii. + 476 pp.
</p>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<p>
Most of the author's remarks are general. He, however, mentions Birkbeck
and advises emigrants to settle in the East rather than to go West as
Birkbeck advised.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hulme, Thomas.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Journal.</hi>
In Cobbett, <q>A Year's Residence
in the United States of America,</q> 259-309. 3d ed. <hi rend='italic'>Andover:
B. Bensley</hi>, 1828.
</p>

<p>
The Journal was of a journey through the West in 1817. Birkbeck's settlement
and the manner of traveling were described. Some information in
regard to prices was given.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hutchins</hi>, Capt. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thomas</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>A topographical Description of
Virginia, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and North Carolina, comprehending
the Rivers Ohio, Kenhawa, Sioto, Cherokee, Wabash, Illinois,
Mississippi, etc.... With a Plan of the Rapids of the
Ohio, a Plan of the several Villages in the Illinois Country ...
and an Appendix containing Mr. Patrick Kennedy's Journal up
the Illinois River. London: T. Hutchins</hi>, 1778. 8vo. 67 pp.
</p>

<p>
Valuable for its map of the Illinois country and a description of the settlements.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Illinois and Wabash Land Companies</hi>:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>An Account of the Proceedings of the Illinois and Ouabache Land
Companies, in Pursuance of their Purchases made of the independent
Natives, July 5th, 1773, and 18th October, 1775. Philadelphia:
William Young</hi>, 1796. 55 pp.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Memorial of the Illinois and Wabash Land Company, 13th
January, 1797. Referred to Mr. Jeremiah Smith, Mr. Kittera,
and Mr. Baldwin. Published by Order of the House of Representatives.
Philadelphia: Richard Folwell</hi>, [c. 1797.] 26 pp.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>An Account of the Proceedings of the Illinois and Ouabache Land
Companies, in Pursuance of their Purchases made of the independent
Natives, July 5th, 1773, and 18th October, 1775. Philadelphia:
William Duane</hi>, 1803. 74 pp.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Memorial of the Illinois and Ouabache Land Companies to the
honorable Congress of the United States. Intended as a full
Recapitulation and clear Statement of the former Addresses, Petitions,
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
Memorials, &amp;c., of the Company; and their short and final
Prayer for Redress, without Delay: presented at the Sessions</hi>,
1802. 20 pp.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Memorial of the United Illinois and Wabash Land Companies, to
the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States.
Baltimore: Joseph Robinson</hi>, 1816. 48 pp.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois, House Journal, 1824-25. Vandalia, Ill.: Robert Blackwell
&amp; Co.</hi>, 1824. 305 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains items on slavery (pp. 13, 151-2), and tells of the election of a
U. S. senator to succeed Ninian Edwards (pp. 38-9).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois Intelligencer. Edwardsville, Ill.: Hooper Warren, ed.</hi>,
1826-30.
</p>

<p>
In St. Louis Mercantile Library.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois Laws</hi>, 1824-25. 190 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 50-51 give the text of an act to amend an act entitled <q>An act respecting
free Negroes, Mulattoes, Servants, and Slaves,</q> approved 30th March,
1819.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois monthly Magazine. Vandalia, Ill.: conducted by James
Hall.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Notes on Illinois in Volumes I. and II. (1830-1832) and the History of St.
Louis in Volume II. are of some service. The articles are, however,
unsigned, and are of too popular a type to be wholly relied upon.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois Revised Laws of 1833. Vandalia, Ill.: Greiner &amp;
Sherman</hi>, 1833. 677 pp. and index.
</p>

<p>
Contains the negro codes of 1819 and 1829, respectively.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Imlay, Gilbert.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>A topographical
Description of the Western
Territory of North America, containing a succinct Account of its
Climate, natural History, Population, Agriculture, Manners and
Customs. London: J. Debrett</hi>, 1792. 8vo. xv. + 247 pp. <hi rend='italic'>3d
ed.</hi>, 1797, enlarged. More valuable.
</p>

<p>
The best early authority on the subject treated. Not very full in regard to
Illinois. Predicts western state-making.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Keating, William H.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of
an Expedition to the
Source of St. Peter's River, Lake Winnepeek, Lake of the Woods,
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
&amp;c., &amp;c., performed in the Year 1823 ... compiled from
the Notes of Major Long, Messrs. Say, Keating, and Colhoun.
Philadelphia: Carey &amp; Lea</hi>, 1824. 2 vols. 8vo. I., xii. + 439;
II., 459 pp. Same, <hi rend='italic'>London: Whittaker</hi>, 1825.
</p>

<p>
Contains an extremely interesting and important description of Chicago and
its vicinity, and in less detail, of northern Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Kinzie</hi>, Mrs. <hi rend='smallcaps'>John</hi> H.
(Juliette A. McGill Kinzie). <hi rend='italic'>Wau-Bun,
the <q>Early Day</q> in the North-West.</hi> New edition with an
introduction and notes by Reuben Gold Thwaites. <hi rend='italic'>Chicago: The
Caxton Club</hi>, 1901. xxvii. + 451 pp.
</p>

<p>
This work, which first appeared in 1856, has the best account, not by an
eye-witness, of the massacre at Fort Dearborn in 1812. Mrs. Helm gives
this account.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Massacre at Chicago, August 15, 1812,
and of some preceding Events. Chicago: Ellis &amp; Fergus</hi>, 1844.
34 pp.
</p>

<p>
A valuable account, written by Mrs. Kinzie from the dictation of her
mother-in-law, who was an eye-witness of the massacre. Incorporated
almost verbatim in Mrs. Kinzie's <q>Wau-Bun.</q> The edition of 1844 was
the first, not the second, as stated in the Chicago Magazine, I., 103, and
repeated by Dr. Thwaites.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Laussat</hi>, Count. <hi rend='italic'>The military
Title of Louisiana and the
Territory of Illinois, dated New Orleans, Jan. 12, 1804, and
signed by Count Laussat, Napoleon's Ambassador. It is also the
order to Gen. De Lassus to deliver the Territory over to Capt. Amos
Stoddard, of the U. S. Artillery.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Original manuscript letter, in French, in the Illinois State Historical
Library, Springfield, Ill.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Loomis, Chester A.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The
Notes of a Journey to the Great
West in 1825.</hi> 28 unnumbered pages, six chapters. Printed
without place, name of publisher, or date.
</p>

<p>
The writer entered Illinois in the present Vermilion county, went south to
the Wabash, west to Vandalia, then to Kaskaskia. His observations are
acute and readable. Describes Vermilion county salines, Illinois farm products,
pioneer homes, and the inconvenience attendant upon traveling on
horseback. Bound with other pamphlets in the Champaign (Illinois) Public
Library.
</p>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A Journey on Horseback through the Great West, in 1825.
Visiting Alleghany Towns, Olean, Warren, Franklin, Pittsburg,
New Lisbon, Elyria, Norfolk, Columbus, Zanesville, Vermilion,
Kaskaskia, Vandalia, Sandusky, and many other places. Bath,
N. Y.; Plaindealer Press.</hi> 27 unnumbered pages.
</p>

<p>
The writer was from Rushville, Ontario county, N. Y. Same as the preceding.
In library of State Historical Society of Wisconsin.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>McLean County Historical Society, Transactions of the.</hi> Vol. II.
<hi rend='italic'>Bloomington, Ill.: Pantagraph Printing and Stationery Co.</hi>, 1903.
695 pages.
</p>

<p>
Some facts of interest concerning the first school in the county, and the
early settlers and their manner of living, are given by those old settlers who
were chief actors.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mandements des Évêques de Québec. Québec: Imprimérie Générale
A. Coté et Cie.</hi>, 1887-88. I., (1659-1740), 588; II., (1741-1806),
566; III., (1806-1850), 635; IV., (1850-1870), 794 pp.
</p>

<p>
A valuable collection of manuscripts. They tell of a monopoly on sending
missionaries to Illinois, and one letter (II., 205) gives a good idea of the
worldliness of the Kaskaskians of 1767. The first two volumes alone concern
us.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mason, Edward G.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Editor</hi>). <hi rend='italic'>Early Chicago and Illinois.
Chicago: Fergus Printing Co.</hi>, 1890. 521 pp.
</p>

<p>
This volume is the fourth of the collections of the Chicago Historical
Society. It is one of the most valuable collections for the study of early
Illinois history. Contains, among other things, Pierre Menard Papers, John
Todd Papers, John Todd's Record-Book, Lists of Early Illinois Citizens,
and Rocheblave Papers.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Meeker</hi>, Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Moses.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Early History of the Lead Region of
Wisconsin. In Wis. Hist. Coll.</hi>, VI., 271-96. <hi rend='italic'>Madison, Wis.:
Atwood &amp; Culver, State Printers</hi>, 1872.
</p>

<p>
Very valuable. Dr. Meeker came to Galena in 1822 and settled there in
1823. The article gives the history of the settlement of the lead region to
1825.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Michigan pioneer and historical Collections. Lansing, Mich.</hi>,
1877-1900. 29 vols.
</p>

<p>
Valuable for the French and British periods of Illinois history.
</p>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Mount Carmel, Articles of Association, for the City of. Chillicothe:
John Bailhache</hi>, 1817. 4to. 22 pp.
</p>

<p>
Mt. Carmel was to be, and now is, on the west bank of the Wabash in
what is now Wabash county, Illinois. The articles drawn up by the proprietors
and their agent contain curious provisions in regard to the support of
church and school. Some Puritanic rules are given. (In <hi rend='italic'>Ill. Local Hist.
Pam.</hi>, VII., in Library of Wisconsin State Historical Society.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Niles' weekly Register, Baltimore.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Of great value for the period 1811-1830. Its notices of foreign immigration
are extensive.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ogden, George W.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Letters
from the West. New-Bedford:
Melcher &amp; Rogers</hi>, 1823. 126 pp.
</p>

<p>
Describes several of the Illinois towns, and characterizes their inhabitants.
A part of the work is plagiarized from Harding, <hi rend='italic'>Tour through the western
Country</hi>. Reprinted in Thwaites, <hi rend='italic'>Early western Travels</hi>, XIX.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Olden Time</hi>, I., 1846, 403-15.
<hi rend='italic'>George Croghan's Journal of
his Route.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Interesting sketches of the French.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Owen</hi>, A. R. <hi rend='italic'>Ums Jahr
1819 und 1829.</hi> In <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch-Amerikanische
Geschichtsblätter</hi>, Jahrgang 2, Heft 2, pp. 41-43. <hi rend='italic'>Chicago:
April</hi>, 1902.
</p>

<p>
Not sufficiently definite, reliable, or extensive to be of much value.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Palmer, John.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
Travels in the United States of
North America and in Lower Canada, performed in the year 1817.
London: Sherwood, Neely, and Jones</hi>, 1818. vii. 456 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 411-20 are on Illinois. Too inaccurate to be of great value, although
some information in regard to roads may be used. Tells of routes, methods,
and cost of travel.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Palmer, John McCauley.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Personal Recollections of John M.
Palmer. Cincinnati: The Robert Clarke Co.</hi>, 1901. 631 pp.
</p>

<p>
The writer came to Illinois in 1831, but he had previously lived in Kentucky,
and he gives some facts concerning slavery that are of value.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Parkison</hi>, Col. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Daniel</hi> M.
<hi rend='italic'>Pioneer Life in Wisconsin.</hi> In
<hi rend='italic'>Wis. Hist. Coll.</hi>, II., 326-64.
<hi rend='italic'>Madison, Wis.: Calkins &amp;
Proudfit</hi>, 1856.
</p>

<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>

<p>
The author came from Tennessee to Madison county, Illinois, in 1817; in
1819, to Sangamon county, Illinois; in 1827, to Galena, Illinois. Gives a
valuable statement concerning the feeling of Yankees toward Southerners,
tells of the first sermon in Sangamon county, and of the Winnebago war of
1827.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Peck</hi>, Rev. <hi rend='smallcaps'>John Mason</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>A Guide for Emigrants</hi> (1831), <hi rend='italic'>containing
Sketches of Illinois, Missouri, and the adjacent Parts.
Boston: Lincoln &amp; Edmands</hi>, 1831. 336 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains a great amount of fairly accurate information. Its description of
cities is especially useful. Page 184 gives an amusing and instructive illustration
of the need of energy and work in even a frontier settlement (1829).
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Memoir of John Mason Peck, D. D., edited from his
Journals and Correspondence. By Rufus Babcock. Philadelphia:
Am. Baptist Pub. Soc.</hi>, 1864. 12mo. 360 pp.
</p>

<p>
Not in good literary form. Throws much light upon the moral and
religious life in Illinois and Missouri from 1817 to 1857.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>The Religion and Morals of Illinois prior to 1818. In
Reynolds, Pioneer History of Illinois</hi>. Pp. 253-275.
</p>

<p>
The writer came to Illinois before 1818, and knew many of the persons of
whom he wrote.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Pennsylvania Packet and daily Advertiser. Philadelphia</hi>, 1785-89;
<hi rend='italic'>Apr.</hi>, 1789; <hi rend='italic'>Mar.</hi>,
1790; <hi rend='italic'>Apr.-Dec.</hi>, 1790. In Library of
Wisconsin State Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
August 23, 1790, the expression of apprehension of the depopulation of
the East by emigration to the West is said not to be well founded.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Peoria County, Illinois, Marriage Licences, 1825-1855.</hi> On file
in the court house in Peoria, Ill.
</p>

<p>
The early names show the French origin of the inhabitants. The absence
of clergymen is noticeable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pike</hi>, Lieut. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zebulon
Montgomery</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>An Account of a Voyage
up the Mississippi River, from St. Louis to its Source; made under
the Orders of the War Department, by Lieut. Pike, of the U. S.
Army, in the Years 1805 and 1806. Compiled from Mr. Pike's
Journal.</hi> A 68 page pamphlet without place, publisher, or date.
</p>

<p>
Locates the largest Sauk village. These reports are of extreme importance.
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
An edition including the trip of 1807 was issued in 1895 by Harper, F. P.,
New York. 3 vols. $10.00.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Pioneer of the Valley of the Mississippi, The. Rock Spring, Ill.:
Rev. J. M. Peck, editor.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Issue of April 24, 1829, in St. Louis Mercantile Library.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pittman</hi>, Capt. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Philip</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>The present State of the European
Settlements on the Mississippi, with a geographical Description of
that River; illustrated by Plans and Draughts. London: J.
Nourse</hi>, 1770. viii. +99 pp. 8 maps.
</p>

<p>
Describes the settlements in Illinois and gives a map of the region. Of
great value.
</p>

<p>
Criticism in <hi rend='italic'>Narrative and Critical History of America</hi>, VI., 702.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Regulators of the Valley.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Charles M. Eames, in his <hi rend='italic'>Historic
Morgan and Classic Jacksonville</hi> (1885),
says that a vigilance committee with the above title was formed in 1821, or
thereabouts, to rid the country of horse-thieves and robbers. <q>A regular
constitution was drawn up and subscribed to, and this paper is still in existence.</q>
C. M. Eames, son of the now deceased author, in a letter of Oct. 7,
1903, said that he had made an unsuccessful search for the manuscript.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reynolds, John,</hi> <hi rend='italic'>My
own Times, embracing also, the History
of my Life. Belleville, Ill.</hi>, 1855. Reprinted, <hi rend='italic'>Chicago: Fergus
Printing Co.</hi>, 1879. iv.+395 pp. $7.50.
</p>

<p>
Verbose, but has much wheat among the chaff. Covers the period from
1800 to 1853. The first edition is now very rare.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ross, Harvey Lee.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The early Pioneers and pioneer Events of
the State of Illinois. Chicago</hi>, 1899.
</p>

<p>
A medley of facts, written by a pioneer of 1820. The author was
acquainted with both Cartwright and Lincoln, and speaks of them and of
pioneer events with authority. Tells of a trip from New Jersey by wagons.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Schoolcraft, Henry Rowe.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Summary Narrative of an
exploratory Expedition to the Sources of the Mississippi River, in
1820; resumed and completed, by the Discovery of its Origin in
Itasca Lake, in 1832. By authority of the United States. Philadelphia:
Lippincott, Grambo, &amp; Co.</hi>, 1855. 596 pp.
</p>

<p>
The book is chiefly of interest to us because of its description of Chicago.
</p>

<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Travels in the central Portions of the Mississippi Valley:
comprising Observations on its mineral Geography, internal
Resources, and aboriginal Population. Performed under the Sanction
of Government, in the Year 1821. New York: Collins &amp;
Hannay</hi>, 1825. 459 pp.
</p>

<p>
The writer descended the Wabash, the Ohio, and then ascended the Mississippi
and the Illinois to Chicago. His descriptions of places, peoples and
things are well written and are a chief historical source.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Schultz, Christian.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Travels on an inland Voyage through
the States of New-York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Ohio, Kentucky,
and Tennessee, and through the Territories of Indiana, Louisiana,
Mississippi and New-Orleans; performed in the Years 1807 and
1808. New York: Isaac Riley</hi>, 1810. 2 vols. I., xviii.+206;
II., 224 pp.
</p>

<p>
Has an interesting description of Illinois settlements.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Smith, William Henry</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Editor. The St. Clair Papers. The
Life and public Services of Arthur St. Clair ... with his
Correspondence and other Papers. Cincinnati: Robert Clarke &amp;
Co.</hi>, 1882. 2 vols. I., viii.+609; II., 649 pp.
</p>

<p>
Much information concerning Illinois under the Ordinance of 1787. Criticisms:
<hi rend='italic'>Nation</hi>, XXXIV., 383; <hi rend='italic'>New York
Tribune, June</hi> 16, 1882.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Stories of the pioneer Mothers of Illinois. A collection of Manuscript
Letters from the pioneer Women of the State, giving their
early Experiences. Collected for the World's Columbian Exposition
and afterward deposited in the Illinois State Historical Library.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Especially valuable for information on reasons for immigration and on
methods of traveling.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Storrow, Samuel A.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The
North-West in 1817.</hi> In <hi rend='italic'>Wis.
Hist. Coll.</hi>, VI., pp. 154-87. <hi rend='italic'>Madison, Wis.: Atwood &amp; Culver,
State Printers</hi>, 1872.
</p>

<p>
The narrative, which is in the form of a letter to Maj.-Gen. Brown, was
first published in pamphlet form. The letter is dated Dec. 1, 1817. It deals
chiefly with the country to the north of Illinois, but the author visited Chicago,
was entertained at Fort Dearborn, and wrote of the desirability of an
Illinois-Michigan canal.
</p>

<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tenney, H. A.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Early
Times in Wisconsin</hi>. In <hi rend='italic'>Wis. Hist.
Coll.</hi>, I., pp. 94-102. <hi rend='italic'>Madison, Wis.: Beriah Brown</hi>, 1855.
</p>

<p>
Written in 1849. Gives considerable information concerning the Galena
region. Tells of the size of Galena and of Springfield, Ill., in 1822. Criticism:
<hi rend='italic'>Draper MSS., Z</hi> 24.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thomas</hi>, Judge <hi rend='smallcaps'>William</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Reminiscences.</hi> Printed in the
<hi rend='italic'>Jacksonville, Ill., Weekly Journal, Apr.</hi> 18, 1877. Clipping
bound in <hi rend='italic'>Ill. Local Hist. Pamphlets</hi>, V., in Library of Wisconsin
State Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
The article is of extreme interest to a student of early society in Illinois.
The author settled in Jacksonville, Ill., in 1826. His observations were unusually
acute. He was a lawyer and a teacher. He tells of Yankees vs.
Southerners, of early lawlessness, and of early Galena.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Winnebago Outbreak of
1827.</hi> In <hi rend='italic'>Chicago Tribune, Apr.</hi>
7, 1877. Reprinted from the <hi rend='italic'>Jacksonville (Ill.) Journal</hi> of Aug.
17, 1871.
</p>

<p>
The article is important because the writer was a volunteer in the campaign
against the Winnebagoes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thwaites, Reuben Gold.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Narrative of Morgan L. Martin.
In an Interview with the Editor</hi> [Thwaites].
In <hi rend='italic'>Wis. Hist. Coll.</hi>,
XI., pp. 385-415. <hi rend='italic'>Madison, Wis.: Democrat Printing Co., State
Printers</hi>, 1888.
</p>

<p>
Page 398 gives an estimate of the population of Galena, which Martin
visited in 1829.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tillson, Christiana Holmes.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Reminiscences of early Life in
Illinois.</hi> Privately printed&mdash;as late as 1870. iv.+138 pp.
</p>

<p>
A very rare book. Copy in the Chicago Historical Society Library. The
best book I know of from which to secure a knowledge of life in Illinois
from 1822 to 1827. The writer was observant, and her command of English
is far superior to that of many old persons who write reminiscences. Of
great value.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Van Zandt, Nicholas Biddle.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A full Description of the
Soil, Water, Timber, and Prairies of each Lot, or quarter Section
of the Military Lands between the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers.
Washington City: P. Force</hi>, 1818. 8vo. 127 pp.
</p>

<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>

<p>
Rare and valuable. Pages 109-25 contain a venomous account of Birkbeck's
settlement in Illinois. In Library of Wisconsin State Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Vermont. Records of the Council of Safety and Governor and
Council of the State of Vermont, to which are prefixed the Records
of the general Conventions from July, 1775, to December, 1777.
Montpelier: J. &amp; J. M. Poland, 1873-80.</hi> 8 vols.
</p>

<p>
Vol. VI., 431-2 contains remarks of Governor Galusha on the scarcity of
food in 1816.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Virginia Patriot and Richmond mercantile Advertiser. Richmond,
Va., Apr.-Dec., 1816.</hi> In Library of Wisconsin State
Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
Sept. 7, 11, 21, 1816, tell of the cold in New England and the drought in
the South.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Volney, Constantin François
Chasse-bœuf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>A View of
the Soil and Climate of the United States of America: with supplementary
Remarks upon Florida; on the French Colonies on the
Mississippi and Ohio, and in Canada; and on the aboriginal Tribes
of America. Philadelphia, 1804. London, 1804.</hi> xxv. + 446 pp.
</p>

<p>
Translated by C. B. Brown. The author gives a moderately full description
of the Illinois of the close of the 18th century. Valuable for characterization
of the inhabitants.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Washburne, Elihu Benjamin.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Sketch of Edward
Coles, second Governor of Illinois, and of the slavery Struggle of 1823-4.
Prepared for the Chicago Historical Society. Chicago: Jansen,
McClurg &amp; Co., 1882.</hi> 253 pp.
</p>

<p>
Indispensable for a specialist in this period of Illinois history. Well
written. Quotes many letters.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>Editor</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>The Edwards Papers. (Volume II. of the Chicago
Historical Society's Collections.) Chicago: Fergus Printing Co.,
1884.</hi> 8 + xxviii. + 633 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 86-90 give Capt. Thos. E. Craig's official report to Governor Edwards
of the attack on Peoria in 1812. The volume has a description of Peoria in
1827, and considerable information concerning the Indian troubles of that year.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Welby, Adlard</hi>, Esq.
<hi rend='italic'>A Visit to North America and the
English Settlements in Illinois, with a winter Residence at Philadelphia;
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
solely to ascertain the actual Prospects of the emigrating
Agriculturist, Mechanic, and Commercial Speculator. London: J.
Drury,</hi> 1821. 16mo. xii.+224 pp.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Wheeling, Va. Report of a Meeting of Workingmen in the City
of Wheeling, Virginia, on forming a Settlement in the State of
Illinois.</hi> 12 pp.
</p>

<p>
The report is dated Oct. 4, 1830. Printed without place and publisher's
name. In Library of Chicago Historical Society. Rare. It set forth a
scheme for purchasing and settling a county in Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Williams, Samuel</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Sketches of the War, between the United
States and the British Isles: intended as a faithful History of all
the material Events from the Time of the Declaration in 1812 to
and including the Treaty of Peace in 1815. Rutland, Vt.: Fay &amp;
Davison</hi>, 1815. 496 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains Capt. Heald's official account of the massacre at Fort Dearborn,
August 15, 1812.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Woods, John</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Two
Years' Residence in the Settlement on the
English Prairie, in the Illinois Country, U. S. With an Account of
its animal and vegetable Productions, Agriculture, &amp;c. &amp;c. A
Description of the principal Towns, Villages, &amp;c. &amp;c. With the
Habits and Customs of the Back-woodsmen. London: Longman
&amp; others</hi>, 1822. 310 pp.
</p>

<p>
Of great value. Unusually conservative as to Illinois advantages, but
apparently truthful.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wright, John S</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Letters
from the West; or, A Caution to
Emigrants. Salem, N. Y.: Dodd &amp; Stevenson,</hi> 1819. 72 pp.
</p>

<p>
A series of letters from one who traveled through the West in 1818-19.
In a fair manner the discouragements which emigrants may expect to meet are
portrayed. In Library of Chicago Historical Society.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>

<div>
<head>II. Secondary Works.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Abbott, John Stevens Cabot</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>History of Maine from the
earliest Discovery of the Region by the Northmen until the present
Time. Boston: B. B. Russell</hi>, 1875. 556 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of the <q>Ohio fever,</q> which raged about the close of the war of 1812,
and which furnished some settlers to Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Agnew</hi>, Hon. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Daniel</hi>,
LL. D. <hi rend='italic'>History of the Region of Pennsylvania
north of the Ohio and west of the Allegheny River ...
also, an Account of the Division of the Territory for public Purposes,
and of the Lands, Laws, Titles, Settlements, Controversies, and
Litigation within this Region. Philadelphia: Kay &amp; Brother,</hi>
1887. 4+246 pp.
</p>

<p>
The work shows the price at which Pennsylvania public lands sold at the
time Illinois was being settled.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Allen, J. A.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>American
Bisons, living and extinct. Cambridge,
Mass.: Welch, Bigelow, &amp; Co.</hi>, 1876. ix.+246 pp. and 12 plates.
</p>

<p>
Carefully done. Tells of the great herds of buffalo early found in Illinois
and of their extermination in that region.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Allen, William Francis</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>The Place of the North-West in
general History.</hi> Pages 92-111 of the author's
<hi rend='italic'>Essays and Monographs.
Boston: Geo. H. Ellis</hi>, 1890. 392 pp. Found also in
<hi rend='italic'>Papers of the Am. Hist. Ass'n</hi>., III., pp. 329-48.
</p>

<p>
Good for a view of our subject as connected with larger portions of the
world's history.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Alton city Directory</hi>, 1858.
<hi rend='italic'>Alton, Ill.: McEvoy &amp; Bowron</hi>,
1858. 156 pp.
</p>

<p>
A short historical sketch of Alton is given. Its authority is on a par with
that of county histories.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>American historical Review.</hi> New York. Vol. IV., 623-35.
See Boyd, Carl Evans, below.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Andreas, A. T.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of Chicago from the earliest Period to
the present Time. Chicago: A. T. Andreas</hi>, 1884. I., 648; II.,
780; III., 876 pp.
</p>

<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>

<p>
Only pages 31-111 of Volume I. concern the period before 1830. The narrative
is written with considerable care, and the work is especially rich in
copies of old maps, having not fewer than two dozen before 1830.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Asbury, Henry</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Reminiscences of Quincy, Illinois, containing
historical Events, Anecdotes, Matters concerning old Settlers and old
Times, etc. Quincy, Ill.: D. Wilcox &amp; Sons</hi>, 1882. 224 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of the first settlement of Adams county, under the congressional act
of Jan. 13, 1825. The large number of New Englanders is suggestive of the
increase of northern over southern immigration.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Atlantic Monthly. Boston and London.</hi> Vol. II., 579-95.
(May, 1861.) See Clarke, S. C.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Barber, John Warner</hi>, and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Howe, Henry</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>All the Western
States and Territories, from the Alleghanies to the Pacific, and from
the Lakes to the Gulf. Cincinnati: Howe's Subscription Book
Concern</hi>, 1867. 16mo. 733 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 195-250 are on Illinois. Early settlement, Clark's campaign, and
the Chicago Massacre of 1812 are described. The work is popular in character,
yet its citation of sources makes it of some value.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Barry</hi>, Hon. P. T.
<hi rend='italic'>The first Irish in Illinois. Reminiscent of
Old Kaskaskia Days.</hi> In <hi rend='italic'>Trans.
of the Ill. State Hist. Soc.</hi>, 1902.
<hi rend='italic'>Springfield, Ill.: Phillips Bros., State Printers</hi>, 1902. pp. 63-70.
</p>

<p>
Almost exclusively concerned with the period before 1830. Tells of the
work of Chevalier Makarty, George Croghan, John Reynolds, and of the Irish
soldiers under George Rogers Clark.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Barstow, George</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>The History of New Hampshire, from its
Discovery, in 1614, to the Passage of the Toleration Act in 1819.
2d ed. New York: G. P. Putnam &amp; Co.</hi>, 1853. 8vo. iv.
+456 pp.
</p>

<p>
Gives a short account of the unusual cold of 1816-17, which affected
western immigration. There is nothing to indicate that the second edition is
not an exact reprint of the first. Copyright, 1842.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beck, Lewis C.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A Gazetteer of the States of Illinois and
Missouri; containing a general View of each State, a general View
of their Counties, and a particular Description of their Towns,
Villages, Rivers, &amp;c., &amp;c. Albany: Charles R. and George Webster,</hi>
1823. 352 pp.
</p>

<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>

<p>
165 pages are devoted to Illinois. Much interesting material is given, but
the nature of the publication makes caution in its use necessary.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beckley, Hosea, A. M.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The History of Vermont; with
Descriptions, physical and topographical. Brattleboro: George H.
Salisbury</hi>, 1846. 16mo. 396 pp.
</p>

<p>
Describes the effects of the unusual cold of 1816-17, which greatly affected
western emigration.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beckwith, Hiram Williams</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Historic Notes on the North-west,
gleaned from early Authors, old Maps and Manuscripts,
private and official Correspondence, and other authentic, though, for
the most part, out-of-the-way Sources.</hi> (In <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Vermilion
County, Ill. Chicago: H. H. Hill &amp; Co.</hi>, 1879. 11-304 pp).
</p>

<p>
Deals with the period before Illinois became a state (1818). <q>The authorities
consulted show a large range of acquaintance with the very best sources
of information extant</q>&mdash;Lyman C. Draper. Strong on French and Indians.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A brief History of Danville, Illinois, with a concise
Statement of its mining, manufacturing, and commercial Advantages.
Danville, Ill.: Danville Printing Co.</hi>, 1874. 11 pp. (unnumbered).
</p>

<p>
Slight, but tells of the beginnings of the city in the third decade of the 19th
century.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beckwith, Paul</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Creoles of St. Louis. St. Louis: Nixon-Jones
Printing Co.</hi>, 1893. 169 pp.
</p>

<p>
The genealogy of the five branches of the Chouteau family is given. As
many of this family were prominent in early Illinois the work is of some
interest, although not wholly reliable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beggs</hi>, Rev.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Stephen R.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Pages from the early History of the
West and North-West: embracing Reminiscences and Incidents of
Settlement and Growth, and Sketches of the material and religious
Progress of the States of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri,
with especial Reference to the History of Methodism. Cincinnati:
Methodist Book Concern</hi>, 1868. 325 pp.
</p>

<p>
Good upon the beginnings of northern Illinois. Tells of the Chicago
massacre (1812), of the work of Rev. Jesse Walker, and of early pioneer life.
No clerical bias, in the bad sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Bernheim</hi>, G. D.
<hi rend='italic'>History of the German Settlements and of
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
the Lutheran Church in North and South Carolina, from the earliest
Period of the Colonization of the Dutch, German and Swiss Settlers
to the Close of the first Half of the present Century. Philadelphia:
The Lutheran Book Store</hi>, 1872. ix.+557 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 471-3 tell of the North Carolina Synod sending a missionary to
Illinois in 1827.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Birney, William</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>James G. Birney and his Times. The
Genesis of the Republican Party with some Account of abolition
Movements in the South before 1828. New York: D. Appleton &amp;
Co.</hi>, 1890. 24mo. x.+443 pp.
</p>

<p>
Chapter 12 is on abolition in the South before 1828. The work is helpful
in learning the conditions from which southern emigrants moved.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Blanchard, Rufus</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Discovery and Conquest of the Northwest,
with the History of Chicago. Wheaton: R. Blanchard &amp; Co.,
1879. Chicago: Cushing</hi>, 1880. 768 pp. 8vo.
</p>

<p>
A well-written and valuable book for discovery and conquest, but of little
value for a study of mere immigration before 1831. What it has of immigration
is almost exclusively confined to immigration to the region of the present
Chicago.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>History of Illinois, to accompany an historical Map of the
State. Chicago: National School Furnishing Company</hi>, 1883. 128
pp.
</p>

<p>
The text is a disconnected symposium, and has in some cases been superseded
by later research. The map is the most valuable part of the work.
It is 27-½x42-½ inches in size, mounted on heavy cloth, and shows, with dates,
Indian trails, routes of exploring and military expeditions, early stage and
mail routes, historic sites, dates of settlement of the principal towns.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Bonham, Jeriah</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Fifty Years' Recollections with Observations
and Reflections on historical Events, giving Sketches of eminent Citizens&mdash;their
Lives and public Services. Peoria: J. W. Franks &amp;
Sons</hi>, 1883. 536 pp.
</p>

<p>
The <q>fifty years</q> seem to have begun shortly after 1830. The biographical
sketches, however, give several facts in regard to the origin and immigration
of such early leaders as Coles, Edwards, Reynolds, Carlin, and others.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Boyd, Carl Evans</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>County of Illinois, The. Am. Hist. Rev.</hi>,
IV., 623-35. July, 1899.
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
A scholarly history of Virginia's ephemeral County of Illinois, although in
error as to the dates of its beginning and ending, respectively.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brackenridge, Henry Marie</hi>,
Esq. <hi rend='italic'>History of the late War
between the United States and Great Britain. Containing a minute
Account of the various military and naval Operations. Baltimore:
Cushing, 1817. 4th ed. Baltimore: Cushing &amp; Jewett</hi>, 1818.
xxiv.+348 pp. <hi rend='italic'>6th ed. Philadelphia: James Kay</hi>, 1839. 298 pp.
</p>

<p>
Valuable. Several times translated. Impartial. Gives a short account of
the massacre at Fort Dearborn, August 15, 1812.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brown, Charles R.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Old Northwest Territory: its Missions,
Forts, and trading Posts. Kalamazoo, Mich.: Brown, Moore
&amp; Quale</hi>, 1875. 32 pp.
</p>

<p>
The work consists of an historical and chronological map (14-½ x 15 inches),
and notes upon the 94 sites located upon it. Eleven of the sites are in Illinois.
Valuable and suggestive, although deficient in citation of authorities.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brown, Henry</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>The History of Illinois from its first Discovery
and Settlement to the present Time. New York: J. Winchester</hi>,
1844. vi.+492 pp.
</p>

<p>
The author confesses to having written in haste and to having borrowed
stories from other states simply to amuse his readers. Worthless except to
furnish a few topics which one may wish
to verify. Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>Draper MSS</hi>.,
Z No. 2.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brown, Samuel R.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Western Gazetteer; or, Emigrant's
Directory, (1817) containing a geographical Description of the western
States and Territories, viz., the States of Ky., Ind., La., O., Tenn.,
and Miss., and the Territories of Ill., Mo., Ala., Mich., and N.
Western, with an Appendix containing Sketches of some of the
western Counties of N. Y., Pa. and Va.; a description of the Gt.
Northern Lakes; Indian Annuities, and Directions to Emigrants.
Auburn, N. Y.: H. C. Southwick</hi>, 1817. 360 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 17-35 give an inaccurate description of Illinois' population and
resources.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Brown, William Hubbard</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>An historical Sketch of the early
Movement in Illinois for the Legalization of Slavery, read at the
annual Meeting of the Chicago Historical Society, Dec. 5, 1864.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chicago: Fergus Printing Co.</hi>,
1876. 31 pp. <hi rend='italic'>Fergus hist. Series</hi>,
No. 4. 8vo. 25 cents.
</p>

<p>
Especially valuable for the great struggle over slavery in Illinois in 1822-24.
First printed in 1865, under the auspices of the Chicago Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Buckley, James Monroe</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>A History of Methodists in the
United States.</hi> (Volume V. of <hi rend='italic'>American Church
History</hi>.) <hi rend='italic'>New
York: The Christian Literature Co.</hi>, 1896. xix.+714 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of the founding of Lebanon Seminary, later McKendree College, at
Lebanon, Ill., in 1828.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chicago City Directory, for the Year 1855-56, and Northern
Illinois Gazetteer. Chicago: Robert Fergus</hi>, 1855. 150+xxxii.+208+128 pp.
</p>

<p>
Of slight value for our purpose, although the historical introductions to the
directories of the various cities and towns have a few usable statements.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chicago daily Democratic Press. Railroads, History and Commerce
of Chicago, three Articles. 2d ed. Chicago: Democratic Press
Job and Book Steam Print</hi>, 1854. 80 pp.
</p>

<p>
Of considerable interest, although many statements are of too late a date
to be used.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chicago Magazine. Chicago, Ill.</hi>
</p>

<p>
I., 103-16 (1857), gives an account of the massacre at Fort Dearborn,
August 15, 1812, largely taken from the Kinzie narrative.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Chicago Sunday Tribune, Nov.</hi> 28, 1897.
</p>

<p>
New light thrown on Old Fort Dearborn. An account of the finding of
important records in the archives of the U. S. government. The archives
contained the original order for building a fort where Fort Dearborn later
stood (order of 1803), and sketches of Fort Dearborn as early as January,
1808. The sketches are reproduced.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Clarke, S. C.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Prairie State, The.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Atlantic Monthly</hi>, VII.,
579-595, <hi rend='italic'>May</hi>, 1861.)
</p>

<p>
Well written and treats a large number of subjects.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Copeland, Louis Albert, B. L.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Cornish in southwest
Wisconsin.</hi> Pages 301-334 of <hi rend='italic'>Wis.
Hist. Coll.</hi>, XIV. <hi rend='italic'>Madison,
Wis.: Democrat Printing Co., State Printer</hi>, 1898.
</p>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<p>
Gives several facts concerning the early history of the Galena region.
Most of the Cornish, however, came after 1830.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dana</hi>, E.
<hi rend='italic'>Geographical Sketches on the Western Country:
designed for Emigrants and Settlers: being the Result of extensive
Researches and Remarks. To which is added a Summary of all
the most interesting Matters on the Subject, including a particular
Description of the unsold public Lands, ... also, a List of
the principal Roads. Cincinnati: Looker, Reynolds &amp; Co.</hi>, 1819.
312 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 133-156 are devoted to Illinois. A suggestion of the fraudulent
count in the census of 1818 is given.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A Description
of the bounty Lands in the State of Illinois:
also, the principal Roads and Routes, by Land and Water, through
the Territory of the United States. Cincinnati: Looker, Reynolds
&amp; Co.</hi>, 1819. 12mo. 108 pp.
</p>

<p>
Gives very few references to settlement and few descriptions of historic
sites.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Davidson, Alexander</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Stuvé, Bernard</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>A complete
History of Illinois from 1673 to 1873; embracing the physical
Features of the Country; its early Explorations, aboriginal Inhabitants;
French and British Occupation; Conquest by Virginia; territorial
Condition and the subsequent civil, military and political
Events of the State. Springfield, Ill.: Ill. Journal Co.</hi>, 1874.
944 pp.
</p>

<p>
Crude, but no specialist in Illinois history should be without it. Not
minute in treatment of immigration.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Decatur, Macon County, Illinois, History of. Decatur, Ill.:
Compiled and published by Wiggins &amp; Co., Cleveland, O.</hi>, 1871.
51 pp.
</p>

<p>
A symposium without historical merit. Almost exclusively of a later
period than 1830, but tells of the first settlement of the county in 1820.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Drake, Samuel Adams</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>The Making of the Ohio Valley
States, 1660-1837. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons</hi>, 1894.
16mo. 269 pp.
</p>

<p>
A very few pages are devoted to Illinois, and naturally the larger events
alone are noted.
</p>

<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Drew, Benjamin.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Refugee; or, The Narratives of fugitive
Slaves in Canada. Related by themselves, with an Account of the
History and Condition of the colored Population of Upper Canada.
Boston: John P. Jewett &amp; Co.</hi>, 1856. 12mo. 387 pp.
</p>

<p>
A few of the refugees whose escapes are narrated passed through Illinois
on the Underground Railroad.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Eames, Charles M.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Historic Morgan and Classic Jacksonville.
Jacksonville, Ill.: Daily Journal Steam Job Printing
Office</hi>, 1885. 336 pp. In Library of Chicago Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
Of great interest because of its details concerning early methods of travel
and concerning the beginnings in Morgan county. Deals with pioneer and
slavery history.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Edwards, Ninian Wirt.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of Illinois, from 1778 to
1833; and Life and Times of Ninian Edwards. Springfield, Ill.:
Ill. State Journal Co.</hi>, 1870. 549 + iii. pp.
</p>

<p>
Written by the son of Gov. Ninian Edwards. Not in good form, but has
much authentic material.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Family Magazine: or, Monthly Abstract of general Knowledge.
New York, Boston, Cincinnati.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Volumes IV. (1837) and V. (1839) have short articles on Illinois, which are
too light to be taken seriously.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Farmer, Silas.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The History of Detroit and Michigan, or the
Metropolis illustrated. A chronological Cyclopedia of the Past end
Present, including a full Record of territorial Days in Michigan
and the Annals of Wayne County. Detroit: Silas Farmer &amp; Co.</hi>,
1884. Revised and enlarged, 1890. 2 vols.
</p>

<p>
Valuable for information concerning Clark, Hamilton, Vigo, and La Balme.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Flagler</hi>, Major D. W.
<hi rend='italic'>A History of the Rock Island Arsenal
from its establishment in 1863 to December, 1876: and of the Island
of Rock Island, the Site of the Arsenal, from 1804 to 1863.
Washington: Government Printing Office</hi>, 1877. 483 pp. 13
plates, 2 pictures.
</p>

<p>
The first chapter of the book refers to the first white settlement in the
region of Rock Island, about 1828.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ford, Gov. Thomas.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A History of Illinois, from its Commencement
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
as a State in 1818 to 1847. Containing a full Account
of the Black Hawk War, the Rise, Progress, and Fall of Mormonism,
the Alton and Lovejoy Riots, and other important and interesting
Events. Chicago: S. C. Griggs &amp; Co.</hi>, 1854. 447 pp.
</p>

<p>
As the title indicates, the book is chiefly valuable for a period later than
1830. It is also largely political. The first one hundred and ten pages will
be found useful and deal to some extent with the social life when the state was
young. Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>Draper MSS.</hi>, Z 13.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gerhard, Fred.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois as it is; its History, Geography,
Statistics, Constitution, Laws, Government, Finances, Climate, Soil,
Plants, Animals, State of Health, Prairies, Agriculture, Cattle-breeding,
Orcharding, Cultivation of the Grape, Timber-growing,
Market-prices, Lands and Land-prices ... etc. Philadelphia:
Charles Desilver</hi>, 1857. 451 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 13-137 are devoted to the history of Illinois. The author is conspicuously
accurate and treats a large number of topics. A valuable secondary
work.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of the Monastery. Scenes from the History of the
Ursulines of Quebec during two hundred Years, 1639-1839. By
a Member of the Community. Second edition, completed by Reminiscences
of the last fifty Years, 1839-1889. Quebec: L. J. Domers
&amp; Frère</hi>, 1897. ix.+418+184 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 84-93 of the first pagination give a suggestive discussion of the
capability of the Indian for civilization.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Green, Thomas Marshall.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Historic Families of Kentucky.
(First Series.) Cincinnati: Robert Clarke &amp; Co.</hi>, 1889. 304 pp.
</p>

<p>
Gives a few facts concerning John Todd and John Todd Stuart, who were
active in Illinois. The latter was a cousin of Mary Todd Lincoln and had
much early influence upon Lincoln. The volume deals with McDowells,
Logans, and Allens. Well written and valuable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Haight, Walter C.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>B. L. The Ordinance of 1787.</hi> (pp. 343-402
of <hi rend='italic'>Pub. of the Mich. Pol. Sci. Ass'n.</hi> II.), 1896, 1897.
</p>

<p>
A discussion of the binding effect of the Ordinance of 1787. The question
has a close connection with slavery in Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hall, B. F.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The early History of the North Western States,
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
embracing New York, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Iowa and
Wisconsin, with their land Laws, etc., and an Appendix containing
the Constitutions of those States. Buffalo: Geo. H. Derby &amp; Co.,
1849.</hi> Duodecimo. 477 pp.
</p>

<p>
Statements made in this book must be carefully verified. The rise of conflicting
land titles is fairly well treated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Harris, N. Dwight</hi>, Ph. D.
<hi rend='italic'>The History of Negro Servitude
in Illinois and of the slavery Agitation in that State 1719-1864.
Chicago: A. C. McClurg &amp; Co., 1904.</hi> 276 pp.
</p>

<p>
An erudite work, compiled from many sources previously unused.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hayes, A. A.</hi>, Jr.
<hi rend='italic'>The Metropolis of the Prairies. (Harper's
New Monthly Mag.</hi>, LXI., 711-730, Oct. 1880).
</p>

<p>
A readable popular article. Chiefly concerned with events later than 1830.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Heaton, John L.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Story of Vermont. Boston: D. Lothrop
Co., 1889.</hi> 319 pp.
</p>

<p>
Has an interesting chapter of twenty pages on The Great West. More
reliable than so popular a book usually is.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Henderson, John G.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Early History of the <q>Sangamon Country,</q>
being Notes on the first Settlements in the Territory now comprised
within the Limits of Morgan, Scott and Cass Counties.
Davenport, Iowa: Day, Egbert &amp; Fidlar, 1873.</hi> 33 pp.
</p>

<p>
Of great interest for a study of early troubles with the Indians. Treats of
East <hi rend='italic'>vs.</hi> South
in Illinois and of Regulators. Deals almost exclusively with
the period before 1830. Compiled largely from interviews with old settlers,
hence not wholly reliable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hinsdale, Burke Aaron.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Old Northwest with a View
of the thirteen Colonies as constituted by the royal Charters. New
York: Townsend MacCoun, 1888.</hi> 8vo. 440 pp. <hi rend='italic'>2d ed., rev.
New York: Silver, Burdett &amp; Co., 1899.</hi> $2.50.
</p>

<p>
In general only the boldest outlines of immigration to Illinois are sketched.
The slavery struggle in Illinois (1822-24) is treated with comparative fullness.
Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>Boston Herald, July 2, 1888</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hoskins, Nathan.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A History of the State of Vermont, from
its Discovery and Settlement to the Close of the Year 1830. Vergennes:
J. Shedd, 1831.</hi> 12 mo. 316 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of the unusually cold summer of 1816.
</p>

<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Howe, Henry.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Historical Collections of the great West: containing
Narratives of the most important and interesting Events in
western History&mdash;remarkable individual Adventures&mdash;Sketches of
frontier Life&mdash;Descriptions of natural Curiosities: to which is
appended historical and descriptive Sketches of Oregon, New Mexico,
Texas, Minnesota, Utah and California. Cincinnati: Henry Howe,
1853.</hi> 8vo. 440 pp.
</p>

<p>
Compiled from a large number of sources, largely secondary.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hubbard, George D.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A Case of geographic Influence upon
human Affairs.</hi> Pages 145-157 of <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin of the American
Geographical Society</hi>, XXXVI., No. 3,
<hi rend='italic'>March</hi>, 1904. <hi rend='italic'>Pub. by the
Society, New York.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A scientific discussion of the effect of glaciation upon the character of the
people of different portions of Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hulbert, Archer Butler.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Red-Men's Roads. The Indian
Thoroughfares of the central West. Columbus, Ohio: Fred J.
Heer &amp; Co., 1900.</hi> 37 pp.
</p>

<p>
The book has many maps and is a help toward an understanding of the
ways by which early settlers reached Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hynes</hi>, Rev. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thomas W.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of a Century. An Address
delivered at Greenville, Bond Co., Ill., on July 4, 1876.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A newspaper clipping, bound, without the name of the paper from which it
was taken, in <hi rend='italic'>Illinois Local
History Pamphlets</hi>, V., in Library of the Wisconsin
State Historical Society. It contains a valuable historical letter from
Mrs. Almira Morse, a resident as early as 1820.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois. Historical Encyclopedia of Illinois. Chicago and New
York: Munsell Pub. Co., 1900.</hi> 608 pp.
</p>

<p>
Edited by Newton Bateman, LL. D., and Paul Selby, A. M. Much more
reliable than many books of the same literary type.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>International Monthly. Burlington, Vt.</hi>, IV., 794-820. See
Turner, Frederick Jackson.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>James, Edmund Janes</hi>,
and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Loveless, Milo J.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>A Bibliography
of Newspapers published in Illinois prior to 1860. Springfield,
Ill., Phillips Bros., State Printers, 1899.</hi> 94 pp.
</p>

<p>
A very valuable work. An appendix gives a list of the Illinois and Missouri
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
papers (1808-1897) in the St. Louis Mercantile Library, while a second
appendix enumerates the county histories of Illinois and tells where they may
be found.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Johnson, Eric</hi> and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Peterson, C. F.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Svenskarne i Illinois.
Chicago: W. Williamson, 1880.</hi> 471 pp.
</p>

<p>
Chiefly valuable for a later period. The salient points of early Illinois
history are canvassed.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Kingdom, William</hi>, Jr.
<hi rend='italic'>America and the British Colonies, an
abstract of all the most useful Information relative to the United
States of America, and the British Colonies of Canada, the Cape of
Good Hope, New South Wales, and Van Diemen's Island. London:
G. and W. B. Whittaker, 1820.</hi> 16mo. 359 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 61-73 describe Illinois and give some judicious advice to emigrants.
Conservative, but not cynical. Entire pages are reprinted from other authors,
notably Fearon, without the use of quotation marks.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Kingston</hi>, Hon. <hi rend='smallcaps'>John T.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Early Western Days.</hi> (In <hi rend='italic'>Wis.
Hist. Coll.</hi>, VII., 297-344). <hi rend='italic'>Madison, Wis.: E. B. Bolens,
1876.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Gives a short account of the slavery struggle in Illinois in 1822-24.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>Slavery in Illinois.
Necedah, Wis.: Necedah Republican.</hi>
6 pp. Reprinted, without date, in pamphlet form. In Library
of State Historical Society of Wisconsin.
</p>

<p>
A very short sketch of slavery in Illinois from its introduction in 1719-20.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Kirkland, Joseph.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Story of Chicago. Chicago: Dibble
Pub. Co., 1892.</hi> 470 pp.
</p>

<p>
The book makes large reference to authorities and is in consequence
valuable for reference.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Körner, Gustav.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Das deutsche Element in den Vereinigten
Staaten von Nordamerika, 1818-1848. Cincinnati: A. E. Wilde
&amp; Co., 1880.</hi> 16mo. 461 pp.
</p>

<p>
The 12th chapter (pp. 244-81) treats of German settlement in Illinois.
Tells of the first German and Swiss settlements in the state. Naturally this
chapter and the work as a whole is largely concerned with a period later than
1830.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Law</hi>, Judge <hi rend='smallcaps'>John</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Address delivered before the Vincennes Historical
and Antiquarian Society, February 22, 1839. Louisville,
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
Ky.: Prentice &amp; Weissinger</hi>, 1839. 48 pp. Enlarged and
reprinted as <hi rend='italic'>The colonial History of Vincennes. Vincennes: Harvey,
Mason &amp; Co</hi>., 1858. 156 pp.
</p>

<p>
Of great value on account of its description of Clark's campaign, and its
notes on Mermet, Gibault, Hamilton, Tecumseh, La Balme, and on the public
lands.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lawrence, John</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>The History of the Church of the United
Brethren in Christ. Dayton, Ohio: W. J. Shuey</hi>, 1868. 2 vols.
I., vi.+416; II., vii.+431 pp.
</p>

<p>
The book contains many facts concerning early emigration and settlement.
Its bearing on early Illinois history is, however, slight.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Leaton</hi>, Rev. <hi rend='smallcaps'>James</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>History of Methodism in Illinois, from
1793 to 1832. Cincinnati: Walden &amp; Stowe</hi>, 1883. 410 pp.
</p>

<p>
Very interesting notes on Peter Cartwright, Jesse Walker, and other
pioneers.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lee, Francis Bagley</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>New Jersey as a Colony and as a
State. New York: The Publishing Soc. of New Jersey</hi>, 1902. 4
vols. I., 422; II., 456; III., 400; IV., 402 pp.
</p>

<p>
The work is superbly printed and illustrated and contains a vast amount of
information, but is totally lacking in bibliography or references, except a few
indications in the index to the illustrations.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Löher, Franz</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte und Zustände der Deutschen in
Amerika. Cincinnati: Eggers &amp; Wulkop</hi>, 1847. v.+544 pp.
</p>

<p>
The chapters of especial interest to us are <q>Ausströmen der Yankees,</q> pp.
237-41; <q>Einwanderung von 1815 bis 1830,</q> pp. 253-58; <q>Die Wohnsitze</q>
(Illinois and Missouri), pp. 337-40. The author cites many authorities, and
his book is of very great value in the study of the assimilation of an expatriated
people.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lothrop, J. S.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>J. S. Lothrop's Champaign County (Ill.)
Directory for 1870-1, with History of the same, and of each Township
therein. Chicago: J. S. Lothrop</hi>, 1871.
</p>

<p>
Tells a great many things&mdash;several of which are false&mdash;concerning the
early period of Illinois history.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lusk, D. W.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Eighty Years of Illinois Politics and Politicians,
Anecdotes and Incidents. A succinct History of the State, 1809-1889.
3d ed. Revised and enlarged. Springfield, Ill.: H. W.
Rokker</hi>, 1889. 609+109 pp.
</p>

<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>

<p>
The 609 pages are political. The 109 pages have a great interest, dealing
as they do with the beginnings of Illinois. Secondary sources are largely
quoted. Not exact enough for critical work, yet very suggestive.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>M'Afee, Robert B.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of the late War in the Western
Country, comprising a full Account of all the Transactions in that
Quarter, from the Commencement of Hostilities at Tippecanoe, to the
Termination of the Contest at New Orleans on the Return of Peace.
Lexington, Ky.: Worsley &amp; Smith, 1816.</hi> 8vo. 534 pp.
</p>

<p>
Very rare. In the Chicago Historical Society Library. A valuable book.
Describes the attack on Fort Dearborn in 1812.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mackenzie, E.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>An historical, topographical, and descriptive
View of the United States of America, and of Upper and Lower
Canada ... the present State of Mexico and South America,
and also of the native Tribes of the New World. Newcastle-upon-Tyne:
Mackenzie &amp; Dent, 1819.</hi> viii. + 432 pp.
</p>

<p>
The four pages devoted to Illinois are interesting and fairly reliable,
though scarcely up to date. The author mentions eighteen works used in
compiling his book.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>McLaughlin, Andrew C.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Lewis Cass. Boston: Houghton,
Mifflin &amp; Co., 1891.</hi> 363 pp. $1.25.
</p>

<p>
Describes the expedition of General Cass to northern Illinois during the
Sauk outbreak of 1827. Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>Nation</hi>, LIII., 204.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Marietta, O.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the Commissioners of the National Centennial
Celebration of the Early Settlement of the Territory North
West of the Ohio River, ... held at Marietta, O., July
15-19, inclusive, 1888. Columbus, O.: The Westbote Company,
State Printers, 1889.</hi> 292 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains many speeches of varying historical accuracy and importance.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mason, Edward Gay.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Chapters from Illinois History. Chicago:
Herbert S. Stone, 1901.</hi> 322 pp.
</p>

<p>
Scholarly and accurate, and rich in citation of sources. Tells of Old Fort
Chartres, John Todd's Record-Book, the march of the Spaniards across
Illinois, and the Chicago massacre.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>March of the Spaniards
across Illinois.</hi> (In his <hi rend='italic'>Chapters
of Illinois History, Chicago, 1901</hi>; also in <hi rend='italic'>Mag. of Am. Hist.</hi>
N. Y., XV., 457-469, 1886.)
</p>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<p>
Refers to a number of sources. The march is that of 1781 against St.
Joseph.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mather, Irwin F.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Making of Illinois. Chicago: A.
Flanagan, 1900.</hi> 292 pp.
</p>

<p>
The work is strong in the number of subjects which it treats. The Illinois
of our period is well covered. The bibliography cites many valuable sources,
but no references are given in the body of the work. The date of the founding
of the village of Kaskaskia is given as 1695&mdash;a confusion of the mission
on the Illinois River with the later village of the same name.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mayo, A. D.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Western Emigration and Western Character.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Christian Examiner</hi>, N. Y., LXXXII., 265-82, 1867.)
</p>

<p>
The subject is well treated, but the value of the article for our purpose is
not so great as it would have been if confined to the early period.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Meigs, William M.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Life of Thomas Hart Benton. Philadelphia
and London: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1904.</hi> 535 pp.
</p>

<p>
The work throws much light upon the policy of the United States in regard
to the sale of public lands, and the attitude of the West towards that policy.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Melish, John.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A geographical Description of the United States,
with the contiguous British and Spanish Possessions. Philadelphia:
John Melish, 1816.</hi> 182 pp.
</p>

<p>
A trifle over one page is devoted to Illinois. Of interest only as showing
what was presented to the East at the time concerning Illinois. Melish was
a professional map and gazetteer maker. His work typifies that of the
geographers of the time, who described the world with marvelous audacity.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>A geographical Description of the United States, with the
contiguous Countries, including Mexico and the West Indies. Philadelphia:
John Melish, 1822.</hi> v.+491 pp.
</p>

<p>
Seven pages are devoted to Illinois. The description of several Illinois
towns is useful. This was a second and much improved edition of the
author's similar work of 1816.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>Information and Advice to Emigrants to the United States:
and from the Eastern to the Western States: illustrated by a Map
of the United States and a Chart of the Atlantic Ocean. Philadelphia:
John Melish, 1819.</hi> 12mo. v.+144 pp.
</p>

<p>
An entire chapter of twenty six pages is devoted to Birkbeck's settlement
in Illinois. The map shows several routes in Illinois, but it must have been
old. The book is a good type of its class.
</p>

<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moore, Charles.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Northwest under three Flags, 1635-1796.
New York: Harper &amp; Bros., 1900.</hi> xxiii. + 402 pp.
</p>

<p>
Many facts concerning the Illinois of the period are given. This work is
of considerable historical value. References to sources, although not abundant,
are helpful.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moses, John.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Illinois, historical and statistical. Comprising
the essential Facts of its Planting and Growth as a Province,
County, Territory, and State. Derived from the most authentic
Sources, including original Documents and Papers. Together with
carefully prepared statistical Tables.... Chicago: Fergus
Printing Co., 1889-93.</hi> 2 vols. 1316 pp.
</p>

<p>
The author was secretary and librarian of the Chicago Historical Society.
His work is perhaps the best that has appeared.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mowry, William Augustus.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The territorial Growth of the
United States. New York: Silver, Burdett &amp; Co., 1902.</hi> 225 pp.
</p>

<p>
The chapter on the Northwest Territory tells of various cessions of land
comprised in the present Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Murat, Achille.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>America and the Americans. New York:
William H. Graham, 1849.</hi> Duodecimo. vii. + 260 pp.
</p>

<p>
Too late in date to be of much service, although some valuable suggestions
as to the social and political development of the frontier can be obtained.
The writer was an acute observer. He treats politics, slavery, society,
religion, justice, etc. The book was written about 1829. Describes customs
and extra legal proceedings in the West.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Nashville, Tennessee, History of, with full Outline of the natural
Advantages.... Nashville, Tenn.: Pub. House of the
M. E. Church, South, 1890.</hi> 656 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of passage of emigrants from North Carolina to Illinois in 1780, of
French traders from Illinois to Tennessee in 1779, of Tennesseeans getting
head rights from George Rogers Clark.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>North American Review, Boston.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Volume LI., 92-140 (July, 1840) has an exhaustive review of Peck's
Gazetteer of Illinois. The review is probably of much more historical interest
than the Gazetteer.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Palmer, B. M.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Slavery in Illinois. (Dubuque semi-weekly
Telegraph, Tues., Sept. 19, 1899.)</hi>
</p>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<p>
Gives the bill of sale, taken from the county records of Jo Daviess County,
Ill., and executed in that county in 1830, of a negro mother and child.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Patterson, Robert Wilson.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Early Society in southern Illinois.
Chicago: Fergus Printing Co.</hi>, 1879. Pp. 103-131 of
<hi rend='italic'>Fergus historical Series</hi> No. 14.
</p>

<p>
A characterization, in general terms, of early Illinois society, its manners
and its origin. This was a lecture read before the Chicago Historical Society,
Oct. 19, 1880.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Peck</hi>, Rev. <hi rend='smallcaps'>John Mason</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Editor. <q>Father Clark</q> or the
Pioneer Preacher. Sketches and Incidents of Rev. John Clark, by
An Old Pioneer. New York: Sheldon, Lamport &amp; Blakeman</hi>, 1855.
287 pp.
</p>

<p>
Gives considerable religious and Indian material for Illinois history from
1790 to 1833, but chiefly on the earlier part of that period.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>An historical Sketch of the early American Settlements in
Illinois, from 1780-1800. Read before the Ill. State Lyceum, at
its anniversary</hi>, Aug. 16, 1832. (<hi rend='italic'>Western monthly Mag.</hi>, I.,
73-83. Feb. 1833.)
</p>

<p>
Popular, but of some value.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Post</hi>, Rev. T. M.
[Author of pp. 93-102.] <hi rend='italic'>Contributions to
the ecclesiastical History of Connecticut; prepared under the Direction
of the General Association, to commemorate the Completion of one
hundred and fifty Years since its first annual Assembly. New
Haven: Wm. L. Kingsley</hi>, 1861. xiv. + 562 pp.
</p>

<p>
A symposium. The article by Rev. Mr. Post is on <q>The Mission of Congregationalism
at the West.</q> It is suggestive on the moral effects of frontier
life.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Powell, J. W.</hi>, Director.
<hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian
Institution, 1896-97. Washington: Government Printing Office,
1899. Part 2. Indian land Cessions in the United States compiled
by Charles C. Royce, with an Introduction by Cyrus Thomas</hi>.
521-997 pp. and 67 plates.
</p>

<p>
Valuable. The work was used in preparing the outline maps of Indian
cessions contained in this work.
</p>

<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reid, Harvey.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Biographical Sketch of Enoch Long, an Illinois
Pioneer. Chicago: Fergus Printing Co., 1884.</hi> 134 pp. This is
Volume II. of the <hi rend='italic'>Chicago Historical Society's Collections</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Long visited St. Louis and resided at Alton and Galena before 1827.
The book is of great interest on account of its notes on the methods of travel
and the extent of Illinois settlements at that date.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reynolds, John.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Belleville in January, 1854.</hi> A 12-page
pamphlet, printed without place, publisher, or date. In Library
of Wisconsin State Historical Society.
</p>

<p>
Tells of the laying out of the city in the cornfield of George Blair, in 1814.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>A biographical Sketch.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Western Journal and Civilian</hi>,
XV., 100-114).
</p>

<p>
Gives glimpses of early travel and of pioneer life.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>The pioneer
History of Illinois, containing the Discovery, in
1673, and the History of the Country to the Year 1818. Belleville,
Ill.: N. A. Randall, 1852. 2d ed., with portrait, notes and index,
Chicago: Fergus Printing Co., 1887.</hi> 459 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains much valuable biographical material, and describes the life of the
early settlers in a clear way. Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>Draper MSS.</hi>, Z 13, 14.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Roosevelt, Theodore.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Winning of the West. New
York: G. W. Putnam's Sons, 1889-96.</hi> Vols. I.-IV.. I., xiv. +
352: II., 427; III., 339: IV., 363 pp.
</p>

<p>
Valuable, although bearing marks of haste in preparation. Criticism:
<hi rend='italic'>Am. Hist. Rev.</hi>, II., 171.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanborn, Edwin David.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of New Hampshire, from
its Discovery to the Year 1830. Manchester, N. H.: John B.
Clarke, 1875.</hi> 422 pp.
</p>

<p>
Describes the unusually cold summer of 1816 and its effect upon western
migration. The book is written in an extremely disconnected style, and is
without index, references, or bibliography.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sergeant, Thomas</hi>, Esq.
<hi rend='italic'>View of the land Laws of Pennsylvania.
With Notices of its early History and Legislation. Philadelphia:
James Kay, Jr., and Brother. Pittsburgh: John I.
Kay &amp; Co., 1838.</hi> 13 + 203 pp.
</p>

<p>
Valuable for ascertaining the price at which Pennsylvania public lands, which
competed with government lands in the West, were sold.
</p>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Shaler, Nathaniel Southgate.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Kentucky. A pioneer Commonwealth.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin &amp; Co., 1885.</hi> viii. + 433
pp.
</p>

<p>
Useful as giving an insight into the character of a neighboring state from
which many of the early settlers of Illinois came. One of the best of the
American Commonwealths series.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Shea, John Gilmary.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Catholic Church in the
United States, 1808-1843. New York: John G. Shea, 1890.</hi>
vii. + 731 pp.
</p>

<p>
References to Illinois are very few, but are important. The volume is the
third in the author's four-volumed History of the Catholic Church in the
United States.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Siebert, Wilbur Henry.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Underground Rail Road from
Slavery to Freedom; with an Introduction by Albert Bushnell Hart.
New York; The Macmillan Co., 1898.</hi> viii. + iii. + 478 pp.
</p>

<p>
Has notes of great interest on the U. G. R. R. in Illinois before 1830.
Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>Am. Hist. Rev.</hi>, IV., 557.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Smith, Theodore Clarke.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Liberty and Free Soil Parties
in the Northwest. New York: Longmans, Green &amp; Co., 1897.</hi>
vii. + 351 pp. (<hi rend='italic'>Harvard Hist. Studies</hi>, VI.)
</p>

<p>
A well-written book, but only the first chapter concerns the period before
1830. This chapter is, however, well worth attention.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Steinhard, S.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Deutschland und sein Volk. Gotha: Hugo
Scheube, 1856-7.</hi> 2 vols. I., x. + 658; II., 826 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 28-46 of volume II. are on the Germans in the United States and
contain a few important facts, including statistics, for our period. The Vandalia
(Ill.) settlement of 1820 is mentioned.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Stevens, Abel</hi>, LL. D.
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Methodist Episcopal
Church in the United States of America. New York: Phillips &amp;
Hunt, 1884.</hi> 4 vols. I., 423; II., 511; III., 510; IV., 522 pp.
</p>

<p>
The fourth volume of this history has interesting notes on Benjamin Young
and Jesse Walker, respectively. These men came to Illinois as pioneer ministers;
the former in 1804, the latter in 1806.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Strong, Moses M.</hi>, A. M.
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Territory of Wisconsin,
from 1836 to 1848. Preceded by an Account of some Events
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
during the Period in which it was under the Dominion of Kings,
States or other Territories, previous to the Year 1836. Madison,
Wis.: Democrat Printing Co., State Printers</hi>, 1885. 16mo. 637 pp.
</p>

<p>
A valuable book. Its chief interest for us is its sketches of early settlement
in the Galena lead region.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sulte, Benjamin.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire des Canadiens-Français, 1608-1880.
Montreal: Wilson &amp; Cie.</hi>, 1882-4. 8 vols. 8vo. About
160 pp. per vol. <hi rend='italic'>Montreal: Granger Frères.</hi> 40 parts, paper,
$10; 4 vols, cloth.
</p>

<p>
Gives only slight attention to the French of Illinois. A popular work,
but quite useful for a study of social institutions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Summers, Thomas O.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Biographical Sketches of eminent itinerant
Ministers distinguished, for the most Part, as Pioneers of
Methodism within the Bounds of the Methodist Episcopal Church,
South. Nashville, Tenn.: Southern Methodist Publishing House</hi>,
1859. 374 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 48-56 give a character sketch of Jesse Walker and an idea of the
character of the men to whom he preached in Illinois in 1807.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Swayne, Wager.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The Ordinance of 1787; and the War of
1861. An Address delivered before the N. Y. Commandery of the
Military Order of the Loyal Legion. New York: C. G. Burgoyne</hi>,
[c. 1893]. 90 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains interesting notes on George Rogers Clark and on slavery in Illinois.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thomson, John Lewis.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Historical Sketches of the late War
between the United States and Great Britain. Philadelphia: Thos.
Desilver</hi>, 1816. 359 pp. <hi rend='italic'>5th ed.</hi>, 1818.
</p>

<p>
Contains one of the earliest accounts of the massacre at Fort Dearborn,
August 15, 1812. The account is short, but tolerably correct. The work
was reprinted in 1887 [Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co.], with a short
account of the war with Mexico added. 656 pp.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thompson, Zadock.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of the State of Vermont, from its
earliest Settlement to the Close of the Year 1832. Burlington:
Edward Smith</hi>, 1833. 12mo. 252 pp. <hi rend='italic'>Reprinted with natural
Hist. of Vt. and Gazetteer of Vt. Burlington: Zadock Thompson</hi>,
1853. 8vo. 224+224+200+63 pp.
</p>

<p>
Describes the cold season of 1816-17.
</p>

<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Thwaites, Reuben Gold.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Early Lead-mining in Illinois and
Wisconsin.</hi> Pages 191-196 of <hi rend='italic'>Am. Hist. Ass'n. Rep't.</hi>, 1893.
<hi rend='italic'>Washington: Government Printing Office</hi>, 1894.
</p>

<p>
Contains several interesting statements concerning the early history of the
Galena region.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tucker, George</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Progress of the United States in Population
and Wealth in fifty Years, as exhibited by the decennial Census.
Boston: Little &amp; Brown, 1843.</hi> 12mo. 211 pp.
</p>

<p>
The fifty years were 1790-1840. Very useful for material concerning the
relative growth of different sections of the country.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Turner, Frederick Jackson.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Middle West, The.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>International
Monthly</hi>, IV., 794-820 (1901).
</p>

<p>
The article has a few suggestions that are of value for our period.
</p>

<p>
&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>The Significance of the Frontier in American
History.</hi> Pages 199-227 of <hi rend='italic'>Rep't. of Am. Hist. Ass'n., 1893</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Contains a valuable characterization of the French as colonizers.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Varney, George Jones.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A brief History of Maine. Portland,
Me.: McLellan, Mosher &amp; Co., 1888.</hi> 336 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of the intense cold of 1816-17 and of the great Western exodus. A
<q>Young People's History.</q> Popular. Without references.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Walker, Edwin Sawyer.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Springfield (Illinois)
Baptist Association. Springfield, Ill.: H. W. Rokker, 1881.</hi> 140 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of the organization of the United Baptist Church, of Springfield, on
July 17, 1830, with eight members.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wallace, Joseph.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The History of Illinois and Louisiana
under the French Rule, embracing a general View of the French
Dominion in North America, with some Account of the English
Occupation of Illinois. Cincinnati: Robert Clarke &amp; Co., 1893.</hi>
vi. + 433 pp.
</p>

<p>
Contains a great deal of material. Usually, though not always, correct.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Warden, David Baillie.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A statistical, political and historical
Account of the U. S. of N. A.; from the period of their first Colonization
to the present Day. Edinburgh: Archibald Constable &amp;
Co., 1819.</hi> 3 vols. 16mo. I., lxiv. + 552; II., 571; III., 588 pp.
</p>

<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>

<p>
Pages 43-65 of Volume III. deal with Illinois exclusively. At the close
of the chapter the author gives a bibliography for Illinois&mdash;five titles and two
maps. A useful book.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wentworth</hi>, Hon.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>John.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Early Chicago. Two Lectures
delivered April 11, 1875, and May 7, 1876, respectively.</hi> 48 and
56 pp. Nos. 8 and 7 of <hi rend='italic'>Fergus historical Series. Chicago: Fergus
Printing Co., 1876.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The critical supplemental notes are of especial interest.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>West, Mary Allen.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>A MS. Letter in the Illinois State Historical
Library.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Tells the story of the coming of James Moore and his party from Virginia
in 1781.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Western monthly Magazine. Conducted by James Hall. Cincinnati</hi>,
I., 73-83. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Peck, Rev. John Mason.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>White, Emma Siggins.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Genealogy of the Descendants of John
Walker of Wigton, Scotland, with Records and some fragmentary
Notes pertaining to the History of Virginia, 1600-1902. Tiernan-Dart
Printing Co., 1902.</hi> xxx. + 722 pp.
</p>

<p>
Valuable. Has original letters from Western emigrants. Suggests the
great influx of people into Illinois in the third decade of the 19th century.
Gives a good idea of the westward drift of population in the United States.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Whiton, John Milton.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Sketches of the History of New-Hampshire,
from its Settlement in 1623 to 1833. Concord: Marsh,
Capen &amp; Lyon, 1834.</hi> 222 pp.
</p>

<p>
Describes the great cold of 1816 and the great emigration to the West.
An unimportant work, confessedly popular, and without references.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wilbur, La Fayette.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Early History of Vermont. Jericho,
Vt.: Roscoe Printing House, 1899-1903.</hi> 4 vols. I., 362; II.,
419; III., 397; IV., 463 pp.
</p>

<p>
Pages 162-3 of Volume III. tell of the unusual cold of 1816-17 and
quote Governor Galusha's reference to the impending famine. No references
are given.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Williams, George Washington.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Negro Race
in America from 1619-1880. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons,
1882.</hi> 2 vols. I., X. + 481; II., 611 pp. The two volumes are
also issued as one.
</p>

<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>

<p>
Gives some statistics concerning slaves in Illinois and notes on Illinois
slavery legislation. The author was a negro.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Williamson, William Durkee.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The History of the State of
Maine: from its first Discovery, A. D. 1602, to the Separation,
A. D. 1820. inclusive. Hallowell: Glazier, Masters &amp; Co.</hi>, 1832.
2 vols. I., iv. + 696; II., 729 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of the unusual cold of 1816-17 and of the great movement toward
the West. Strong in citation of authorities. Much above the average of
State histories of its time.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wilson, Henry.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Rise and Fall of the slave
Power in America. Boston: James R. Osgood &amp; Co.</hi>, 1872-7.
3 vols. I., vii. + 670; II., 720: III., 774 pp. <hi rend='italic'>Houghton.</hi> 3 vols.
</p>

<p>
Valuable material on slavery in Illinois. A strong work.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Winsor, Justin.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>The westward Movement: the Colonies and
the Republic west of the Alleghanies, 1673-98; with full cartographical
Illustrations from contemporary Sources. Boston: Houghton,
Mifflin &amp; Co.</hi>, 1897. 595 pp.
</p>

<p>
Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>Am. Hist. Rev.</hi>, III., 556.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Withers, Alexander Scott.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Chronicles of border Warfare,
or A History of the Settlement by the Whites, of North-western
Virginia: and of the Indian Wars and Massacres, in that Section
of the State. Clarksburg, Va.: Joseph Israel</hi>, 1831. 319+iv. pp.
Very rare. <hi rend='italic'>Same. New ed., edited and annotated by Reuben Gold
Thwaites. Cincinnati: Clarke</hi>, 1895.
</p>

<p>
A few references are to events in Illinois.
Criticism: <hi rend='italic'>Am. Hist. Rev.</hi>,
I., 170.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Young, William T.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Life and public Services of General Lewis
Cass. 2d ed. Detroit: Markham &amp; Elwood</hi>, 1852. 420 pp.
</p>

<p>
Tells of Gen. Cass' expedition to Illinois during the trouble with the Sauk
Indians in 1827.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>A</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aboite river, 35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Act creating Illinois county, 9, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Act enabling Illinois to form a state government, 115.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agricultural Society, formed, 168.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agriculture, 130, 165. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Farming, Fruits, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albemarle county, <hi rend='italic'>Va.</hi>, 153, 154.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alton, founding of, 196, 204;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land donations for church and school, 142.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alvord, Clarence W., 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American Bottom, 130, 134, 157; map, <hi rend='italic'>in pocket</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American Fur Company, 157, 158.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American House, Springfield, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anarchy in Illinois, 40 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ended, 69.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancient Free and Accepted Masons, founded, 194.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderson, Robert, mention, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antanya, Michael, 67.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anti slavery agitation. <hi rend='italic'>See under</hi> Slavery.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anti slavery Society, Morgan Co., 183.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arkansas Post, 63.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arks, 125, 126;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>price of, 161.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Flat-boats.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assenisipia, mention, 46.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augusta county, <hi rend='italic'>Va.</hi>, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austin, Moses, 196.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>B</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagargon, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi>, elected magistrate, 61.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baker, David J., 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baltimore, 123, 160, 161.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bandits, 155.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bank of Cairo, 114.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bank of Edwardsville, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bank of Mt. Carmel, 199.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptists, organized, 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>found Shurtleff college, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divided on slavery, 175.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barbour, Philip, mention, 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barges, 94, 129, 160.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barter, 130. <hi rend='italic'>See also under</hi> Money.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bates, Edward, 204.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Batteaux, 94.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baynton, Wharton and Morgan, trading firm, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bears, 14, 173.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beauchamp, William, 197, 198.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beef, cost of, 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellefontaine, 51.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellevue, Iowa, terrorized by mob, 208.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bentley, <hi rend='italic'>Capt.</hi>, 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biddle, Nicholas, mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biggs, William, leg. coun., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birds, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birkbeck, Morris, founds English settlement, 124;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>method of fencing, 165.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birkbeck's Settlement. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> English Settlement, The.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black Hawk, 81.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black Hawk War, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Black Laws,</q> 176, 186.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Blue Laws,</q> of Mt. Carmel, 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blue Point, 157.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bond, Shadrach, delegate to Congress, 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>governor of Illinois, 145, 208.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Books, 132.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bosseron, <hi rend='italic'>Maj.</hi> F., 18, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bountylands. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Military bounty lands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brady, &mdash;&mdash;, 38.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brandy, price of, 97.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brashears, <hi rend='italic'>Capt.</hi>, mention, 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brick houses, 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridges, 114.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British at Michilimackinac attempt to divert Indian trade, 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expeditions against Illinois settlers, 31-39, 107.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<lg>
<l>British Michilimackinac Company, 49.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffalo, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Building, cost of, 168.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burr, Aaron, mention, 203.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butter, price of, 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>C</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cahokia, attacked by British and Indians, 33;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bounty lands, 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commons, 72;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>court, 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distress at, 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>population, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cahokia Indians, 53.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cairo, Bank of, 114;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dykes at, 114.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calhoun, original name of Springfield, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calico, price of, 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvé, &mdash;&mdash;, trader, 33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canadian French settlers, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canal route ceded, 110.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carbonneaux, Francis, 42-46.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlyle, eastern limit of frontier, 107;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salt discovered, 18, 23, 171.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carolinas, The, settlers from, 91.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carondelet, <hi rend='italic'>Baron</hi> de, orders expulsion of Americans from Ft. Massac, 73.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cartwright, Peter, journey to Baltimore, 1816, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personal traits, 191, 192;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purchases land, 139;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reasons for moving to Illinois, 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representative from Sangamon Co., 191.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cass, <hi rend='italic'>Gov.</hi> Lewis, averts Indian war, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>protects Galena, 150.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholicism, slow increase of, 175.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cattle, allowed to run at large, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>raising of, 130.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Live-stock.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Census of 1801, 88.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cessions of land, by Indians, 44, 79-81, maps, 72, 104, 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by individuals, 10, 24, 71, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Virginia to United States, 45, 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>congressional, 57, 70, 72, 79.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charleston, <hi rend='italic'>Va.</hi>, emigration from to Illinois, 190.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chicago, in 1830, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>massacre at, 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>platted, 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>post-office, 151;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>route to, 152;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>valuable port, 116.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chicago Historical Society, 5, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chicago river, Indians cede tract six miles square at, 79.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chickasaws, allies of Spain, 73.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chippewa Indians, 134.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cincinnati, trip from to Illinois, 1823, 154.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clark, George Rogers, 14, 40, 45 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land granted to, 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seizes Spanish goods, 54.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clay, Henry, mention, 210.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clergy, 174, 175, 196.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Climate, 95.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clinton, De Witt, mention, 203.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coal, in Illinois, 14, 131, 142, 165.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cobbett, William, 160.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coffee, price of, 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coles, <hi rend='italic'>Gov.</hi> Edward, character, 210;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emancipates slaves, 209;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>governor, 145, 208;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>message against slavery, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>special envoy to Russia, 209;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>urges law to prevent kidnapping, 182.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>College township, reserved by Ordinance of 1787, 101, 102.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colleges, McKendree, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shurtleff, 174.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collot, <hi rend='italic'>Gen.</hi> [George Henry] Victor, <q>Journey in N. A.,</q> 14, etc.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Map of the Country of the Illinois, <hi rend='italic'>in pocket</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commerce in territorial period, 95, 96, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Committee of Workingmen of Wheeling, <hi rend='italic'>Va.</hi>, 144.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commodities, prices of, 49, 59, 130, 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commons, Cahokia, 72.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congress, delegate of N. W. Territory in, 76. 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>donates land, 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>early Illinoisians in, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>memorialized:&mdash;by Galena, 150;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Illinois, 87, 100, 101, 138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>petitioned, 53, 74, 75, 77, 78, 81, 86, 88.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constitution of Illinois, provisions of, 117.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constitutional Convention, 1824, 182, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>votes for and against, chart of, 184.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cook, Daniel P., non-resident proprietor of Springfield, 205;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representative in Congress, 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corn, price of, 96, 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cotton, production of, in United States 122, 129;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>raised in Illinois, 167, 168.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Counterfeiting, penalty for, 148.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Counties in Illinois, 1824, list of, 183.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Courts, 15, 17, 60, 62.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> under Illinois, Kaskaskia, Vincennes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cox, <hi rend='italic'>Col.</hi> Thomas, joint owner of Springfield, 206-208.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crawford, William Henry, <hi rend='italic'>Secretary of
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
War</hi>, announces land policy, 109.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crockett, David, mention, 205.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croghan, George, description of Vincennes, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cruzat, <hi rend='italic'>Spanish Commandant at St. Louis</hi>, 39.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumberland Presbyterians, 143.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>D</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Capt.</hi>, 34;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>elected magistrate, 61.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dartmouth College, mention, 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davis, Jefferson, mention, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deane, Silas, mention, 34.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Debtors, imprisonment of, 147.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deer, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demoulin, Dumoulin, <hi rend='italic'>or</hi> De Moulin, John, 74.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demunbrunt, Demunbrun, <hi rend='italic'>or</hi> De Munbrun, Thimothé, 22, 41.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Detroit, land office at, 80;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>threatened by de la Balme, 35, 36.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dickinson College, mention, 210.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dixon's ferry. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Ogee's ferry.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dodge, <hi rend='italic'>Capt.</hi> John, 22-23, 26-27, 67.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ducharme, <hi rend='italic'>trader</hi>, 33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ducoigne, &mdash;&mdash;, 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duncan, Joseph, 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easton, Joseph, emigrant from England, 1633, 203.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easton, Rufus, founder of Alton, 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>political career, 204.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edgar, John, career of, 174, 193, 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>correspondence concerning anarchy in Illinois, 67;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land holdings of, 10, 101;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to St. Clair, 85.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edwards, Ninian, appointed governor of Illinois Territory, 111, 113, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in War of 1812, 107, 108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>message of 1828, 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on prices of public lands, 138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>political career of, 210;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wages offered by, 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edwards county, Birkbeck's settlement in. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> English Settlement.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edwardsville, Bank of, 207;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>public lands at, 105, 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ellery, Abm. R., mention, 203.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emancipation. <hi rend='italic'>See under</hi> Slavery.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emigration and immigration, 127, 176 <hi rend='italic'>et seq</hi>.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>causes of:&mdash;from New England, 120,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>from the South, 121, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cost of, 124;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>food supply for emigrants, 119, 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>increase, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>opposition to immigration, 91.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>English Settlement, The, 124, 157, 161, 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cost of transportation to, 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ships produce to New Orleans 154.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Birkbeck, Morris; <hi rend='italic'>also</hi> Flower, George.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enos, Pascal Paoli, joint proprietor of Springfield, 205, 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enos, <hi rend='italic'>Maj.-Gen.</hi> Roger, 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ernst, Ferdinand, mention, 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Extinguishment of Indian land titles, 77, 79, 81, 109, 144, 146.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>F</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Falls of Ohio, 30, 64, 65, 160, 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Ft. Harmar;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>also</hi> Shipping-port.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farming methods 168.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Federal Government owns land, 158.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fencing, 165 n., 169.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferguson, Thomas, leg. coun., 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferries, 83, 114, 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fever, 95.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also under</hi> Health.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fever river, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lead mines at, 150.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Financial panic, 1819, 188-189.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fisher, <hi rend='italic'>Dr.</hi> George, rep., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fisher, Myers, mention, 195.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flat-boats, 94, 124, 125, 129, 154, 160.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Arks.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flax, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florida, Province of, 71.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flour, price of, 49, 50, 94, 163, 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flour-mills, 167;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>built by John Edgar, 193.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flower, George, 124.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> English Settlement.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Food, scarcity, 21-23, 25, 28, 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supply of, 133.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also under</hi> names of food products.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Chartres, cannon from, 108;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inhabitants, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Dearborn, massacre at, 109;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 190.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Edwards, terminus of mail route, 151.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Harmar, 64.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Jefferson, 24, 25, 30.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort La Motte, mention, 107.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Massac, 73, 79, 95, 107.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Nelson, mention, 32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Russell, established, 108.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>

<lg>
<l>Fort Stanwix, mention, 56.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fort Wayne, Treaty of, 79.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox Indians, 33, 81.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox river, first flour-mill on, 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franklin, Benjamin, mention, 34, 195.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fredonian</hi>, mention, 197.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Free masons, organized, 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freehold qualifications, 77, 112, 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freeholders, housekeepers privileged as, 147.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freight charges, 94, 124, 160 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>French, Augustus C., 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>French settlers, attitude toward Americans, 47-49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land holdings 13, 18, 99;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>misled by La Balme, 34;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered free land by Spanish, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priests, emigrate from Illinois co., 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>towns, character of, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>French-Swiss from Lord Selkirk's colony reach Galena, 172.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frontier, The, 48, 91, 100, 147, 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Carlyle eastern limit of, 107.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frontiersman, analysis of character of, 191, 201, 202.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fruit, 129, 133, 168.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fuel, scarcity of, 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulton county separated from Madison, 188.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fur trade, 96.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> American Fur Company.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furs, 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>G</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gage, <hi rend='italic'>Gen.</hi> Thomas, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galena, 150-53; lead-mining, 172.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallatin county, saline, 170;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slaves in, 180.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Game, 14, 51, 132.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gamelin, Antoine, clerk of District Court, Post Vincennes, 60.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>George, <hi rend='italic'>Capt.</hi> Robert, mention, 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germain, <hi rend='italic'>Lord</hi> George, mention, 32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gibault, <hi rend='italic'>Father</hi> Pierre, mention, 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Governor and judges, 58, 62.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grammar, John, rep., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grand Ruisseau, 52.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Granger, <hi rend='italic'>Postmaster-General</hi> Gideon, mention, 203.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gratiot, Charles, 39.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Great Britain, King's proclamation, 1763, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Great Western Road, 157.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greene county, separated from Madison, 188.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greenville, Treaty of, 79.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>H</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilton, Alexander, 138;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 91.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilton, <hi rend='italic'>Gen.</hi>, leads British against Vincennes, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hampden Sidney College, mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamtramck, <hi rend='italic'>Maj.</hi> John F., at Kaskaskia, 53;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>petitioned for troops, 65.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hancock, John, mention, 34.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harmar, <hi rend='italic'>Gen.</hi> Josiah, 50; advice to French, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expedition from Vincennes to Kaskaskia, 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on emigration from Illinois, 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuses request for troops, 69.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrison, Benjamin, 40;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives petition for General Assembly, 85.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Health, 27, 91, 95.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry, Mr., elected magistrate, 61.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry, Patrick, 209;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instructions concerning Illinois County, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hinde, Thomas S., career in Illinois, 196, 197;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>description of Peter Cartwright, 192.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hog raising, 14, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hogs, 144.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honey, 129, 130, 133.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hooker, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi> Thomas, founder of Hartford, <hi rend='italic'>Conn.</hi>, 203.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse stealing, 65, 67, 69.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hubbard, Adolphus Frederick, 210.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hubbard, Gurdon Saltonstall, agent American Fur Company, 157.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hubbard's Trail, extent of, 157.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunting, as occupation, 132.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huron (Ouisconsin or Wisconsin) Territory, claims Galena, 150.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iles, Elijah, career of, 205, 206.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iles, Elizabeth Crockett, mention, 205.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illinois:&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Country</hi>, British in, 10 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>climate, 14, 95;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Collot's description of, 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>map, <hi rend='italic'>in pocket</hi>:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conditions in 1787, 50, 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>development, 97, 98;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enters second grade of territorial government, 85, 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>French population, 10, 12, 13, 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>French settlers offered free land by Spanish, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>game in, 14, 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>governor and judges, 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indian owners of, 10 <hi rend='italic'>et
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inhabitants of, 12, 13;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immigration to, 91, 92;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>labor conditions in, 96, 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>population in 1767, 1772, 1788, 70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in 1790, 1800, 1810; 91, 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>racial conflicts in, 54, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rivers of, 92, 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>roads, 13, 14, 93, 94, 131;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>separation from Indiana, 85 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>squatters in, 71.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>County</hi> (1778-1783), Act creating, 9, 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Act renewed, 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Act dissolved, 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>anarchy, 40 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>anomalous position, 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bankrupt, 40;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>civil organization, 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>condition in 1780, 25, 26;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>courts, 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extent of, 9, 10;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>French inhabitants dissatisfied, 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hardships in early period, 21, 22;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judges, election of, 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>military and civil authorities conflict, 25-27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>military operations, 19, 22-24, 32-39;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>money scarce, 21;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spanish claims, 38.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Territory</hi>, books in, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boundaries, 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cattle raising, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commerce in, 96, 129;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>delegates in Congress, 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>election of officials, 112;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enters second grade of territorial government, 112;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extent, 89;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>formed, 89-90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>governor and judges, 111, 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>immigration to, 120, 121, 124, 126, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indian troubles in, 106 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>internal improvements proposed, 114;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>internal revenue, 1814, 128;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judges for, 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land office authorized, 103;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land policy, 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws, 111, 112, 114;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legislature, 100, 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legislature southern in nativity, 112 n., 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manufactures, 1810, 128, 129;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>newspapers in, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>petitions for state government, 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>physical features, 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>population, 1810, 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>post-roads, 131;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>productions, 129 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>qualifications for representative, 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slavery, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> general alphabet;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suffrage in, 112;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taxes, 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transportation, 114, 129, 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>State</hi>, admission proposed, 115, opposed, 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>agriculture in 1820, 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Black Laws,</q> 176, 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boundary, eastern, 90, northern, 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cattle raising, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cessions of Indian lands, 134, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>coal in, 14, 142, 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitution completed, 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cost of living in, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>counties, list of, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>debtors, 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>election in 1822, 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>election laws, 1826, 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emigration, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> General alphabet;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Enabling Act of 1818, 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>food supplies, 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>government southern in character, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>governors, list of, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>House of Representatives, mention, 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Congress, 118, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indian agents, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indian land claims, 134, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indian traders, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Indian wars, 146, 207;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>internal revenue, 128;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judicial circuit, 173;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> general alphabet;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws, southern influence on, 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manners and customs, 128 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>manufactures, 128;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>money, substitutes for, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New Englanders in, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>newspapers, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>northern boundary changed, 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>population required for admission, 116, 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>postal facilities in, 151, 158, 159;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>products of, 129, 167 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>public lands, 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salt springs legislation, 101;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>school tax, 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>senators and representatives, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlement typical, 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slavery, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> general alphabet;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>southern influence in, 183, 184, 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taxation, 1828, compared with that of Kentucky, 149, 150;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>transportation, cost of, 150; facilities, 124, <hi rend='italic'>see also</hi> general alphabet;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treasury receipts 149;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>squatter population, 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>voting in 1820, 148.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illinois and Michigan Canal, estimated cost of transportation by, 141;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>route ceded, 110;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 115.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illinois Company, holdings of, 10, 44.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illinois Herald, 132.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illinois Intelligencer, 132, 140.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illinois Land Company, 10 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illinois river settlements, 134.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illinois Navigation Company, 114, 115.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illiteracy of French inhabitants, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immigration. <hi rend='italic'>See with</hi> Emigration.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indentured servitude, 117, 176 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indian agents, 134.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians, 11, 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>employed by British, 32;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land cessions, maps: 1705-1801, 72;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1809-1818, 104;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1818-1830, 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reservations, 134, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>titles to land extinguished, 77, 79, 81, 109, 144, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traders, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tribes: Cahokias, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Chickasaws, 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Chippewas, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Foxes, 33, 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Kaskaskias, 12;</l>
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Kickapoos, 110;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Menominees, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mitchas, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mitchigamias, 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ottawas, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ouias, 29;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Peorias, 12, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Piankashaws, 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Potawatomies, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sauks, 33, 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sioux, 31;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tamarois, 110;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Winnebagoes, 135.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indiana, population, 91, 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>route to, from North Carolina, 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slavery, 185.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indiana Territory, divided, 81, 88, 89;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>formed, 84.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>J</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacksonville, 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>English emigrants at, 189.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jarrott's mill, 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jefferson, Thomas, mention, 203, 204.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, <hi rend='italic'>Capt.</hi> elected magistrate, 61.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, <hi rend='italic'>Col.</hi> R. M., 163.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jones, John Rice, career of, 195, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with Clark, 54.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jones, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi> William, rep., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judges, election of, 17, 58, 111.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judy, Samuel, leg. coun., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jurors paid, 58.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jury, trial by, 60.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justices of the peace, not paid, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>K</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kane, Elias K., 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaskaskia, bounty lands, 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>court, 17, 19;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judicial district of, 44;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land office at, 103, 136, 137, 138, 143.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaskaskia Indians, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keel-boats, 125, 129;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rates, 161.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kenton, Simon, 179.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kentucky, emigration to Illinois, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>journey from, to Illinois, 1819, 155;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 21, 24, 32, 33, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>population, 1790, 1800, 1810, 91, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1820, 181.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kentucky boats, 93, 94.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kentucky Gazette</hi>, 189.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kickapoo Indians, 110.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kidnapping of negroes, 186.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King's proclamation, 1763, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knox county, 75 n., 86.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kohos (Cahokia), mention, 27.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>L</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>La Balme, <hi rend='italic'>Col.</hi> Augustin Mottin de, career of, 33 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labor questions, 96, 97, 99, 130, 169.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lafayette, <hi rend='italic'>Marquis</hi> de, entertained by John Edgar, 193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lake Michigan, advantages to Illinois of port on, 115, 116.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land, Act of 1791, 72; canal, 141, 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cessions by Indian tribes, 72, 104, 110, 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cession by Virginia to U. S., 45, 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>church and school, 141, 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>classified for taxation, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cultivation of, 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertility of, 14, 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>form of holdings, 13, 38;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>French deeds to, 13;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>government entry of, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Kickapoo cession of, 1819, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>military, 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>owned by Federal Government, 158;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prices, 57, 80, 88, 92, 103-5, 136-8, 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rental of, 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spanish donate to French, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tavern sites, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taxes on, 130;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unoccupied in Kentucky, Ohio and Indiana, 98.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Public lands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land-claims, 10;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Illinois, 140.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land-companies, 10, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land-frauds, referred to Congress, 99, 100.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land-grants, investigated, 57.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land-holders, non-resident, mention, 140, 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land-offices 80;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Illinois, 44 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, 103.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Land-titles, insecure, 51, 71;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>King's proclamation, 1763, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laws: <q>Black Laws,</q> 176, 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Blue Laws,</q> 200;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>territorial, 111-14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>La Valiniere, Pierre Huet de, mention, 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lead, output of, 1823-1827, 151.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lead region, rush to, 1826, 172.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Le Dru, removes to St. Louis, 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>signs petition, 66.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Le Grand, signature on land grant, 45.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legras, <hi rend='italic'>Col.</hi> P., at Vincennes, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Limestone beds at Alton, 204.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lincoln, Abraham, in Black Hawk War, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Linctot, 38 n., 39 n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Live-stock, 27, 83, 169. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Cattle.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Log canoes, 93.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Log houses, cost of, 168.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Long Prairie, 74.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis XVIII. of France, mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louisiana, emigration to, 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>province of, 91.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Louisiana Gazette</hi>, report of steamboat speed, 162.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<lg>
<l>Luzerne, <hi rend='italic'>Chevalier</hi>, 30, 36.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyon, Matthew, on price of lands, 88.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>M</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McCarty, Richard, 19, 20, 26, 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed, 29.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McDowell, William, 196.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McIlvaine, <hi rend='italic'>Miss</hi> Caroline M., 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McKendree College, opened by Methodists in 1828, 174.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McLean, John, 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McMaster, John Bach, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madison, <hi rend='italic'>Governor of Kentucky</hi>, 197.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madison, James, mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madison, John, 196.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madison county, population 1820, 1824, 1825, 132, 188.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magistrates, 59 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, 67.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mail routes 1825-1830, 158, 159.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malaria, 91, 95.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manufactures, 128, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maple sugar, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marietta, O., 71.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage, mixed, 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>without priest, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary of the Incarnation, <hi rend='italic'>Mother</hi>, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maryland, settlers from, 91.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mason and Dixon's line, 179.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massachusetts, emigration to Illinois, 189.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mechanics' lien, 149.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menard, Pierre, leg. coun., 113, 208;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lt.-Gov., 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menominee Indians, 134.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Methodist Episcopal Church, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 191.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meurin, <hi rend='italic'>Father</hi>, mention, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michigan, legislature meets in summer, 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michilimackinac, British at, 32, 39, 46, 47, 69.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miliet, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi>, elected magistrate, 61.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Military bounty lands, 57.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Military organization, etc. <hi rend='italic'>See under</hi> Illinois.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Military Tract, land in, sold for taxes, 140.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mills, 83, 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miro, Estevan, <hi rend='italic'>Governor of Louisiana and Florida</hi>, proclamation of, 63, 71.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mississippi river, navigation of, 21;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlement on hindered, 88.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missouri, population, 82, 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slavery in, 179, 180.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missouri Compromise, 178.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitchigamia Indians, 12, 52.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Money, scarcity, 21, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monroe, <hi rend='italic'>President</hi> James, letter to Jefferson, 97;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montgomery, <hi rend='italic'>Lieut.-Col.</hi> John, 15 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morals. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Public morals.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morgan, &mdash;&mdash;, member of trading company, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morgan, George, agent of Indiana Company, 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land frauds, 56, 57.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morgan county, anti-slavery society, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>freehold rights to housekeepers, 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>separated from Madison, 188.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morrison, William, landholdings of, 74, 100, 101.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mount Carmel, Bank of, 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>donation of land for church and schools, 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founding of, 196, 198;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incorporation, 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, Edward, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, William, mention, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>N</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Negroes, 12, 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>punishment of, 179.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Slavery.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Design, founded. 91, 92, 95;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 83.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New England, immigrants from, 146.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Jersey Land Company, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Madrid (L'Anse a la Graisse), 63 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Orleans, flour market, 193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Orleans boats, 93, 94.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newspapers:&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Illinois Herald</hi>, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Illinois Intelligencer</hi>, 132, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Kentucky Gazette</hi>, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Louisiana Gazette</hi>, 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Shawnee Chief</hi>, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Western Intelligencer</hi>, 132.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Non-resident landholders, 140, 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North Carolina, route from, to Indiana, 156.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northwest Territory, bounties in, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>congressional delegate seated, 76;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divided, 76, 84, 85;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enters second degree, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first sale of public land in, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>judges, 62;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laws, 83, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magistrates, 61;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taxation, 83.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ogee's (Dixon's) ferry, 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oglesby, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi> Joshua, rep., 113.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>

<lg>
<l>Ohio, emigration to, 76, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>population, 91, 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>public land sale, 144.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ohio Company, 71.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ohio river, boundary of Illinois, 10;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlers, 88;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlers northwest of, 18, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordinance of 1784, 46.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordinance of 1787, 40;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>amendments to, 115, 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>anti-slavery article, 176 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>college township reserved by, 101;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effect on Illinois country, 54, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>violation of, 87.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ottawa Indians, 135.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ouia, town, 30.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ouia (Wea) Indians, 29.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ouisconsin (Wisconsin) Territory, Galena claimed by, 150.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>P</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paget, M., mill built by, 193.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, sale of public lands at, 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parker, Joseph, of Kaskaskia, 53, 54.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peck, <hi rend='italic'>Rev.</hi> John M., Baptist minister, 124, 125, 192.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peltry, debts paid in, 21, 43, 60.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peoria, Indian agent at, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 79.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peoria Indians, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philips, Joseph, territorial secretary, 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piankashaw Indians, 81.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pierre, Eugenio, 38.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pike county, separated from Madison, 188.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pioneer clergy, 191 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pirogues, 93, 94, 160.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plums, at Smith's Prairie, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pollock, Oliver, 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polypotamia, mention, 46.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pope, Nathaniel, and the northern boundary, 115, 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>delegate in Congress, 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Population, 1788, 70;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1785-1799, 82;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1801, 88;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1790-1810, 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1818, 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1812, 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1820-1840, 187, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>French, 1766-1777, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Post routes. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Mail routes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Post Vincennes, court regulations for, 59, 135.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Vincennes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potatoes, price, 97, 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potawatomie Indians, 134.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prairie du Chien, inhabitants, 1801, 88.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prairie du Rocher, bounty lands, 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inhabitants, 1766-1777, 12;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1801, 88.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prairies, 83, 86, 97, 109, 131, 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertility of, 165 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlement, 130, 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preëmption rights, 72, 75, 77, 78, 100, 102, 111, 113, 139, 144, 152;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in various states, 102 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Presbyterians, at Galena, 175;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cumberland Presbyterians, 143.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prices of commodities, 49, 59, 97, 130, 131, 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of land, <hi rend='italic'>see under</hi> Land.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priests, French, emigrate from Illinois, 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pro-slavery agitation. <hi rend='italic'>See under</hi> Slavery.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Provisions, scarcity of, 21-23, 25, 28.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Public lands, donated for schools and internal improvements, 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>price of in various states, 103, 104, 105;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proceeds of sales applied to roads and schools, 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receipts from sale of, 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sales in Illinois, 77, 81, 105, 106, 137, 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sales in other states, 103, 104, 144;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tax regulations of, up to 1818, 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Public morals, 28, 29.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Publications. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Books, Newspapers.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Q</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quebec, Bishop of, pastoral letter, 1767, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>R</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Randolphs, The, mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Randolph county, formed, 75 n., 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slaves in, 180.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rangers, volunteer for guard service, 108, 109.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regulators of the Valley, 147.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religious denominations, 172 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reynolds, <hi rend='italic'>Gov.</hi> John, 145, 196.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richland Creek, settlement, 78.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>River craft, 93, 94, 126, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivière du Chemin, fight at, 37.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roads, 86, 116, 153 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Illinois settlements to Galena, 151;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>repairs, 158;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shawneetown to Birkbeck's settlement, 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to Kaskaskia, Cahokia and St. Louis, 101, 102, 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Vandalia to Springfield, 157.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also under</hi> Illinois; <hi rend='italic'>also</hi> Toll roads.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rock river, 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rock Spring Seminary (Shurtleff College) founded by Baptists in 1827, 174.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>

<lg>
<l>Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Capt.</hi> &mdash;&mdash;, defense of, 28, 29.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roosevelt, Theodore, <q>Winning of the West,</q> 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rush, Benjamin, mention, 195.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>S</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Clair, <hi rend='italic'>Gov.</hi> Arthur, 10, 64;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Kaskaskia, 69;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>establishes counties, 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>president of Congress, 54.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Clair, James, 74.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Clair, John Murray, 10, 193.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Clair, William, 74.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Clair county, divided, 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>formed, 75 n., 82.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Josephs, expedition against, 37, 38.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Louis, attacked by British, 33;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>population of, 1817, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Treaty of, 1804, 81.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Marie, Joseph, goods confiscated by Spanish, 63.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Philips, inhabitants of, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Pierre, <hi rend='italic'>Father</hi>, leaves Cahokia, 68.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ste. Geneviève, garrisoned by Spanish, 74.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saline creek salt works, slave labor at, 117.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saline river reservation, sale of, 142.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saline spring in Gallatin county, 170, 171.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salt, discovered at Carlyle, 1823, 171;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legislation concerning, 101;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prices of, 170 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>works, New York, 153.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sangamon county, emigration to, 1810-1825, 188;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>housekeepers as freeholders, 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>separated from Madison, 188.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sauk Indians, 33, 81.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schools, academic, funds given for, 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>common, established, 173;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>early, 173;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land granted for, 116, 141, 142;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teachers, 173, 174.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotch-Irish opposed to slavery, 92.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selkirk, <hi rend='italic'>Lord</hi>, colony, 172.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seminaries, location of, 174.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servitude, indentured, 117, 176, 177, 179.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Shawnee Chief</hi>, 132.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shawneetown, description, 1817, 125-7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land-office at, 103;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>road to Kaskaskia, 101, 102, 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sale of public lands, 105, 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shipping, 93, 94, 125, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shippingport, Falls of Ohio, mention, 162.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Short, Jacob, rep., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shurtleff College (Rock Springs Seminary) founded by Baptists in 1827, 174.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sickness. <hi rend='italic'>See under</hi> Health.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sioux Indians, 31, 32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skiffs, 93, 94.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slave code, enacted in 1819, 179.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavery, 64, 65, 176 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abolition recommended by Coles, 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>anti-slavery article of Ordinance of 1787, 55, 177, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Black Laws</q> of Illinois, 176, 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children of slaves, 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitutional provisions, 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decrease of, 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effect on settlement, 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>freeing of slaves, 64, 65, 177, 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>French slaveholders, 55, 176, 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>importation of slaves authorized, 87;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>increase, 180, 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>indentured servitude, 117, 176 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legalization, 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>number of slaves, 1820, 1840, 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ordinance of 1787, 55, 176, 177, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>whipping of slaves, 179.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slave-trade, abolition of, 178.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith's Prairie, fruit at, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soulard, <hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi>, 152.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southern influence in Illinois, 145, 180.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain claims the Illinois country, 38;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offers free land to Illinois settlers, 55, 71;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuses to allow navigation of Mississippi, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spanish, aggression upon United States, 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trouble Illinois settlers, 21, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sprigg, <hi rend='italic'>Judge</hi> William, 111.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Springfield, called Calhoun when founded, 196;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>first store, 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land-office at, 144;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sales of public land, 137, 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>terminus of mail route, 158.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Squatters in Illinois, 50, 58, 72, 99, 148.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>State Historical Society of Wisconsin. <hi rend='italic'>See under</hi> Wisconsin.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steamboats, first on Ohio and Mississippi, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>speed and rates of, 160, 162, 163.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephenson, Benjamin, delegate in Congress, 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stuart, <hi rend='italic'>Judge</hi> Alexander, 111, 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stuart, John T., mention, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffrage, qualifications, 77, 78, 112-14, 117, 147, 148.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sugar, maple, 129.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supreme Court, U. S., decision of, 11.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<lg>
<l>T</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talbott, Benjamin, leg. coun., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tallmadge, James, opposes admission of Illinois, 118, 179.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamarois, Indians, 110.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tardiveau, Bartholomew, 51, 52, 55, 69.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tavern-keepers (housekeepers) given freehold privileges, 147.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tavern-sites, land ceded for, 75, 79.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taxation, in N.-W. terr., 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of land, 130, 133;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of live-stock, 83.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, Zachary, mention, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tazewell, L. W., mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tea, price of, 130.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teachers, salaries of, 174.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tennessee, lands sold for taxes, 189.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tennessee wagon, 155.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Judge</hi> Jesse B., signs petition for retention of slavery in Illinois, 111, 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>territorial judge, 113, 145.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timber, want of, 131.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Todd, <hi rend='italic'>Col.</hi> John, <hi rend='italic'>Jr.</hi>, 15, 16 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toll roads, 157.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tomahawk rights, 51.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trading firms: Baynton, Wharton and Morgan, 10;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>British Michilimackinac Company, 49.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trammell, Philip, rep., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transportation,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cost:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>via</hi> canals, 141;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>via</hi> rivers, 124, 125, 126, 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>improvement in facilities, 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land, 93, 126, 154-7, 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>water, 83, 92 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, 114, 126, 129.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> River craft, Wagons.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Treaties.&mdash;Fort Wayne, 1803, 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Greenville, 1795, 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. Louis, 1804, 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spain-U. S., commercial treaty, 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Vincennes, 1803, 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>1805, 81.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trottier, F., 36.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turbine wheel, 167.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turner, Frederick Jackson, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turnpike, 93.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>U</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>United States Supreme Court decision, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>V</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vandalia, mention, 188, 189;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>land-office at, 207;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>public lands sold, 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vegetables, 168.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vehicles, 152, 155, 156;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emigrant wagons, 159, 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tennessee wagon, 155.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vermilion saline, 142.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vincennes, accept inducements of Morgan, 63;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attack on, 32, 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>court, 17, 59;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>description of, 13;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>levy of troops at, 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treaty, 1803, 79;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treaty, 1805, 81.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Post Vincennes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virginia, Augusta county, 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Board of Commissioners for the Settlement of Western Accounts, 42-44;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cedes Western lands to the United States, 45, 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emigration from, to Illinois, 91, 92, 190, 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legislation for protection of Illinois county, 9;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>military bounty lands, 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>money, 21, 23, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vote, August 2, 1824, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>chart of, 184.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>W</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wabash Land Company, 10 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, 88.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wabash Navigation Company, 200.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wabash river, boundary line, 90, 154;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expedition on, 41;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>landholders on, 10, 87, 88.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wages, 96, 169.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wagons, first, Galena to Chicago, 152.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Vehicles.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>War of 1812, 106 <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>; mention, 118.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Water supply, 86.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wayne county, separated from Illinois, 86.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wea. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Ouia.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>West, The, Commerce of, 96.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Western Christian Monitor</hi>, mention, 197.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Western frontier. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Frontier; <hi rend='italic'>also</hi> Wilderness.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Western Intelligencer</hi>, 132.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Western Territory, Ordinance for government of, 46.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westward movement, 190.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wharton, &mdash;&mdash;, member of trading firm, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheat, price of, 164.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheeling, <hi rend='italic'>Va.</hi>, Committee of Workingmen, 144.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wild animals, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilderness, description of, 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mention, 95.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Frontier.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilderness Road, 93.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkins, John, <hi rend='italic'>British Commandant in Illinois</hi>, 10.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Gen.</hi> James, 204.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Maj.</hi>, 39.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilson, Alexander, rep., 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winnebago Indians, 135, 151.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winnebago war, 135, 146, 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winston, Richard, 17, 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sheriff at Kaskaskia, 26, 41, 61.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wirt, William, mention, 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisconsin, southern boundary, 150.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wisconsin, State Historical Society of, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolves, 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bounty for, 84, 148.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wood, scarcity of retards settlement, 165.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wyllys, <hi rend='italic'>Maj.</hi>, 69.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Y</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yorkshire, <hi rend='italic'>England</hi>, emigrants from, reach Jacksonville, 189.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Z</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zewapetas, 63.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/illus-4.png' rend='width: 60%'>
    <figDesc>Illustration: Map of Illinois Country.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
